STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS
”STILL BUILDING A BETTER GHANA”
BY
H.E. JOHN EVANS ATTA MILLS
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA
2 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 16th, 2012.

STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS
I thank you for the opportunity to be here to perform my constitutional duty.
Article 67 of the Constitution requires the President at the beginning of each
session of Parliament to deliver a message on the state of the nation.
I intend to do just that; to deliver a message on the state of the nation which I
daresay is stable and in reasonably good health.
The economy is full of promise and in terms of development; we are making
substantial progress even though there is still a lot of work to be done.
THE ECONOMY
The Global Economy
Madam Speaker,
Over the past three years that I have been President, much has been achieved in
pursuance of our “Better Ghana” Agenda.
Even though we have experienced internal and external constraints, we have
reason to be hopeful of Ghana’s future.
Madam Speaker,
A recent report by the World Bank has alerted developing countries of further
economic shocks this year and the need for contingency planning.
We are therefore watching developments in the global economy with hope and
apprehension.
Hope, because the easing of the global crisis is likely to give rise to economic
stability and expansion that will impact on our economy; apprehension, because
further weakening of the Highly Indebted Rich Countries (HIRCs) and of the global
economy will have serious economic consequences not least on commodity
STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS - 2012
3 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
prices.
Notwithstanding the global economic uncertainties, this administration has
continued to make progress in the management of the national economy.
The Macro-Economy
Madam Speaker,
Under my watch, Ghana has recorded the highest ever growth rate in the annals
of our nation’s history with a provisional growth rate approaching 14%.
In my 2011 State of the Nation Address, I described inflation as the worst
economic nightmare any country can go through because it breeds economic and
financial difficulties and imposes hardships on the most vulnerable.
I stated then that our success in confronting inflation in the previous year was
notable; the challenge was to remain on course.
I am happy to report that indeed we remained on course.
We recorded the most sustained single digit rates of inflation in decades, with
the rate of inflation of 8.55% for 2011 being the lowest in 42 years since 1970.
As at the end of September, the budget deficit was 2% of GDP as compared to
14.5% of GDP in 2008.
With the exception of the level of the budget deficit which was higher than
anticipated, we have managed to attain the macroeconomic projections
contained in the 2008 NDC Manifesto for a Better Ghana.
The credit belongs to all Ghanaians and to the Government as the direct
managers of the economy as well as Parliament as its monitors.
The positive economic indicators we have achieved have resulted in increased
investor confidence in the economy.
A fortnight ago the Ghana Investment Promotion Centre released figures
showing an increase in projects registered at the GIPC amounting to over
$7billion in foreign direct investment.
That said, I expect the recently established Inter Agency Task Force to ensure full
compliance of provisions of the GIPC Act especially relating to Immigration and
tax.
4 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
On the revenue side, let me recommend, CEPS, IRS, and VAT, for the good work
being done.
There is still a lot of work to be done and I am confident that these Organisations
will not let the nation down.
EDUCATION
Madam Speaker,
Our achievements in managing inflation, budget deficit and realizing high GDP
growth rates have reflected in the progress made in many key areas of national
development.
A snapshot of the education sector provides a good example of how far we have
come within the short time span of 3 years.
Basic Education
In the city of Accra for example efforts have been made to bring an end to the
school shift system which has been a drawback in the fight for quality education.
Several classroom structures have been constructed providing accommodation
for hundreds of pupils who now benefit from a full day classroom teaching.
Contracts for the construction of over 1,700 classroom blocks for schools under
trees have been awarded throughout the country.
On completion, the 4,320 schools under trees that existed in 2009 would be
reduced by about 40%.
We are on course to eradicating the schools under trees phenomenon.
We have distributed over 3 million school uniforms to needy pupils nationwide.
This means that with a basic school population of about 5.2 million, we have
supplied school uniforms to three out of every five children in basic school.
Under our free exercise books scheme, over 40 million exercise books have been
supplied to all pupils in basic public schools.
On the average, 8 exercise books have been supplied to each pupil per year in
both 2010 and 2011.
In respect of the school feeding programme, we have rationalized selection to
target more needy communities. 
5 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
In all, coverage has been expanded.
Second-Cycle Education
Madam Speaker,
As regards the second cycle level of the educational strata, about 672 emergency
classroom blocks and dormitories are in various phases of completion
nationwide.
Indeed, on my nationwide tour last year, I commissioned many of such
completed projects.
In line with our social democratic principles, we aim at making secondary
education accessible to every Ghanaian child of school going age by 2016.
The completion of the emergency classroom blocks will make it possible to
increase second cycle enrolment.
Between 2013 and 2015, we intend establishing additional community second
cycle schools throughout the length and breadth of the country, particularly in
under-served districts.
As far as this Administration is concerned, education is the key to giving the
youth the skills they need to make the most of their lives.
Investing in the right education and addressing youth unemployment are two
sides of the same coin.
Thus, besides emphasizing on formal classroom education, we are using the
National Apprenticeship Programme, LESDEP, and other programmes for the
teaching of employable skills.
So far, these programmes have made a great impact on youth employment in the
informal sector of the economy.
It is expected that the shift of the NYEP focus from traditional paid modules to
trade and vocation modules will encourage self-employment.
Madam Speaker, pursuance to a pledge made last year, the School of Fisheries at
Anomabo, a satellite college of University of Cape Coast, is underway.
Also, a head office building for the Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences is under
construction.
Science, Communication Technology and Innovation 
6 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Madam Speaker,
Important changes have taken place in the communication industry in Ghana.
In July last year, Mobile Number Portability was introduced offering choice to
mobile phone subscribers.
A lot of preparation on digital broadcasting migration has been going on and we
are on course to switch over from analogue to digital in December 2014 ahead of
the 2015 deadline set for all countries.
Related to this and in line with the imperatives of today’s digital world is the
importance of giving Ghanaian youth and students opportunities to gain skills in
information and communication technology.
These are the tools for future employment and economic growth.
Under our Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) policy, provision is made for
the distribution of free laptops to schools and students nationwide.
So far close to 60,000 laptops have been distributed and it is expected that by
June this year, the number would have doubled.
This surely is good news for our students who hitherto had to write their Basic
Education Certificate Examination ICT papers without having ever seen or
touched the key pad of a computer.
Tertiary Education
Madam Speaker,
Before Parliament rose from its third and final meeting last year, the bills on the
establishment of the University of Health and Allied Sciences in the Volta Region
and the University of Energy and Natural Resources in the Brong Ahafo Region,
were passed.
Work is seriously in progress as regards putting in place the needed
infrastructure for staff and students.
Indeed, the Governing Councils of the two universities have been inaugurated
and it is expected that admissions will begin when the new academic year begins
sometime in September.
A lot has also been achieved in terms of improved infrastructural facilities for
effective teaching and learning in the existing public tertiary institutions. 
7 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
In the particular case of the University of Development Studies, we have made
available funds for the expansion of infrastructural facilities and procurement of
laboratory equipment and other projects.
Human Resource Training And Development
In the area of Human Resource Training and Development in foreign universities
since 2009, the GETFUND has been providing funding in anticipation of
employment in the following areas:
1. Emerging Oil & Gas Sector
2. The University of Health & Allied Sciences (Faculty)
3. The University of Energy and Renewable Natural Resources (Faculty)
4. Other Public Universities
5. The broader National Economy.
JOB CREATION
Madam Speaker,
This Administration has been concerned about job creation and its importance
for the growth of the economy and the development of the nation.
Indeed, the second pillar of the National Democratic Congress (NDC) Manifesto
addresses the building of a Strong and Resilient Economy as well as the Creation
of Jobs.
It is on this account that as soon as this Government settled, we organized a
special Cabinet Retreat to deal solely with this vital subject.
It would be recalled Ministers, as leaders of their sectors, were directed to work
with the leadership of the private sector to find innovative ways of creating jobs
outside the traditional employment avenues.
I can say with confidence that many jobs have since been created outside the
non-traditional areas of employment.
Of course, many have also been employed via the traditional employment
avenues.
With the expected heavy infrastructure expansion as well as the building of the
allied petrochemical industries associated with our oil and gas find, I can safely 
8 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
project that many more jobs will be created by the time the tenure of this
Government comes to an end.
AGRICULTURE
Crop Farming
Madam Speaker,
We have also made progress on the agricultural front.
True to our commitment to modernizing agriculture, the Government has
increased the stock of Rice Combine Harvesters, maize harvesters; additional
grain-cocoon storage facilities and bore holes for agricultural purposes where
none existed.
Agricultural Mechanization Service Centers have also been established.
As a result of targeted interventions in the agricultural sector, we have recorded
significant increases in rice, yam and maize production.
Cotton
Madam Speaker,
Our cotton farmers in the Northern Regions can attest to how far we have gone
in reviving the cotton industry while Government intervention has resulted in a
sizeable increase in cotton production.
Irrigation
Madam Speaker,
Between 2009 and 2011, Government has rehabilitated several irrigation dams in
the three northern regions, the Greater Accra, Volta, Ashanti, and Brong Ahafo
regions.
With the completion of a master plan for irrigation development, the first phase
of the Accra Plains Irrigation Project covering an area of about 11,000 hectares
will begin this year.
Cocoa
9 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Madam Speaker,
For the first time ever, Ghana produced over one million tonnes of cocoa in 2011.
Our output last year was over 50% the output in 2008 which was 680,000 tonnes.
In terms of the percentage of the world cocoa price that is paid to the farmer, we
have out-performed every government in our history.
At an average world market price of US$2,450.00 per tonne in January 2012, we
are paying the cocoa farmer about 80% of the world market price.
Sheanut
Madam Speaker
A new shea nut factory has been established at Buipe in the Northern Region, to
process sheanuts for export. The factory is expected to process close to 40,000
tons a year.
Government has already inaugurated the National Steering Committee to
formulate programmes and strategies for growing and sustaining the industry.
The floor price for purchases at the farm gate has been fixed to ensure that the
farmers are not shortchanged.
Madam Speaker,
Government through COCOBOD has launched a 6-year cocoa re-planting
programme to rehabilitate old cocoa farms in Ghana.
The programme entails the production of elite cocoa hybrid seedlings for
distribution to farmers free of charge to be used in replanting.
The main objective of the programmes is to create employment opportunities for
our youth in cocoa growing communities throughout the period of the
programme and assist them to acquire the relevant techniques and skills in cocoa
production under the Youth in Agriculture Programme.
Another objective is to encourage under-producing farmers to expand their
acreage and increase their yield.
Fisheries
Madam Speaker,
10 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
This administration has taken steps to enforce the Fisheries Regulations and
protect fisheries resources. To this end some patrol vessels have been acquired
and will soon be commissioned.
Implementation of a Fisheries and Aquaculture Development Plan will begin this
year.
A turnkey fish processing plant at Elmina is expected to commence this year.
WATER
Madam Speaker,
We pledged in our Manifesto to focus on the production, distribution and supply
of water taking into account the needs of the poor. We also pledged to build and
expand a number of water plants nationwide.
Since 2009, we have constructed hundreds of boreholes fitted with hand pumps,
hand dug wells with hand pumps and piped water systems throughout the
country.
Several others have been rehabilitated.
I have directed that at least 20,000 boreholes be constructed nationwide over
the next four years.
The Government has absorbed the 5% contribution by communities to the capital
cost of construction of rural water systems in rural communities.
The Kpong Water Expansion Project is expected to add 40million gallons of water
daily to the Accra-Tema Metropolis.
The many interventions we have made in the urban water sector are expected to
bring about an increase in coverage from the present 62% to 80% by 2015.
ENERGY
The Power Sector
Madam Speaker,
This Government inherited a total electricity generation capacity of around 1,800
megawatts in 2009.
We have since installed an additional 376 megawatts to the generation capacity. 
11 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Additional capacity will be added this year through the expansion of the Takoradi
International Company (TICO), the planned completion of the Bui project, the
development of the Kpone Thermal Power Plant; and the completion of the Tema
Osono Power Project.
By the end of 2013, power generation should reach about 3,300Mw, an over 80%
increase in the generation capacity we came to meet.
Madam Speaker,
The national electricity transmission system that we inherited was saddled with
over-aged and obsolete equipment, overloads, high losses, low voltage and
evacuation constraints, among others.
We have, since assuming office, taken action to improve the situation.
These have included the completion of transmission networks and substation
projects at Buipe in the Northern Region; Kpando, Ho and Asiekpe in the Volta
Region; Sunyani and Techiman in the Brong Ahafo Region; Obuasi and Kumasi in
the Ashanti Region; Tema and Accra in the Greater Accra Region; Winneba in the
Central Region and Takoradi in the Western Region.
In all honesty, the phenomenon of “dumsor, dumsor” is not as bad as it used to
be at the time we took over the management of the affairs of state and it is our
determination to continue to work to make the situation much better than it is
currently.
Rural Electrification
Madam Speaker,
From 2009 to date, under the various rural electrification projects, over 1,700
communities have been connected to the national grid.
We are aiming to extend electricity to a further 4,000 or more communities
covering all the regions in the country.
I would like to mention that the programme to provide street lights to all regional
capitals is proceeding according to plan and will in future be extended to cover all
municipal and district capitals in the country.
Oil and Gas
Madam Speaker,
12 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
At the end of last year, Ghana had earned a total of US$444,124,724 from the
sale of the Ghana Group’s 4liftingstotalling 3,930,189 barrels of crude oil.
We have made and will continue to make full public disclosure of all oil liftings
and revenues accrued even as we hope for success in on-going oil and gas
exploration in other areas.
The appointment and inauguration of the Public Interest Committee under the
Chairmanship of an eminent Ghanaian is to demonstrate the Government’s
intention to enhance transparency and accountability.
Once again, this Government has demonstrated its commitment to a Ghana-first
approach to the handling of national affairs wherever the national interest can
better be served that way.
There have been some challenges in production at the Jubilee Oil Field. As a
result, production estimates have been scaled down pending the completion of a
remedial programme.
The Ministry of Energy and the newly established Petroleum Commission are
positively keeping a close eye on the matter.
Madam Speaker,
The Ghana National Gas Company Limited (Ghana Gas) which is charged with
responsibility to build, own and operate infrastructure required for gathering,
processing, transporting and marketing of natural gas resources in the country
has commenced business in earnest especially in the area of the development of
gas infrastructure.
The completion of the project will stimulate diversification of the national
economy.
THE SINGLE SPINE SALARY STRUCTURE
Madam Speaker,
In my State of the Nation Address last year, I informed this House of the bold and
courageous steps we had taken to implement the new pay policy, popularly
referred to as the Single Spine Pay Policy (SSPP).
As at that time, just about 11% of public service employees had been migrated
onto the Single Spine Salary Structure (SSSS).
13 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
In the 2011 Action Year, over 80% of public service employees were migrated
onto the SSSS and the process is expected to be completed within the year.
The implementation of the SSSS has not been without challenges.
We regret the hiccups and I wish to express Government’s appreciation to
Organised Labour and Associations for their continued support and collaboration
as we work to successfully implement the Single Spine Pay Policy.
With the huge increase in the wage bill resulting from the implementation of the
SSSS, Government expects that there will be commensurate increase in efficiency
and productivity in the Public Services.
SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT AREAS
Madam Speaker,
In my first State of the Nation address in 2009, I indicated that SADA and
CEDECOM will be used to address the peculiar poverty related problems in the
three Northern regions and the Central region respectively.
In the intervening period, the law that formally establishes the Savannah
Accelerated Development Authority has been passed and the Authority has been
formally established.
CEDECOM is the shell around which the Western Corridor Development
Authority will be created.
The creations of the other Development Authorities that I mentioned in my 2011
Address are receiving very active attention at the NDPC and will follow in the
course of the year.
HEALTH
National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS)
Madam Speaker,
The National Health Insurance Scheme continues to grow with utilization rising
from about 600,000 in 2005 to over 17.5million as at December 2011.
There is the urgent need for dialogue and consensus on financing of the NHIS to
ensure sustainability.
Currently, measures are being implemented for cost containment through
improved provider payment systems. 
14 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Meanwhile, for better customer orientation the scheme has planned to start a
call centre to make it more user-friendly.
Health Infrastructure
Madam Speaker,
Our plan to improve access to quality healthcare is very much on course via a
number of on-going projects nationwide.
Indeed, a number of new health facilities have been completed within the last
three years and will soon be put to use, notable of which is the Winneba
Municipal Hospital.
Significant progress has been made on the Tamale Teaching Hospital
rehabilitation project.
Government is also strengthening the capacity of existing Regional, District
Hospitals, and Polyclinics.
Five polyclinics will be completed by the end of June in Wechiau, Babille, Ko,
Lambussie and Hain, all in the upper west region.
Government’s intervention in the deplorable state of the Korle-bu Teaching
hospital has led to the procurement of life support equipment and new oxygen
plants, the installation of which will soon commence.
Under the National Medical Equipment Replacement Project, Government is
providing life support equipment, and medical imaging in selected District
Hospitals nationwide as well as re-equipping radiology departments in the
teaching and regional hospitals with state of the art Magnetic Resonance
Imagers, and CT scanners.
These centers are also receiving mammography units to make breast cancer
screening routine.
Equipment will be supplied and installed in district hospitals as well as health
centers across the country.
15 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
As a matter of fact, state-of-the-art Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machines
are currently being installed at the Komfo Anokye and Tamale Teaching Hospitals.
It is expected that in the course of the year, MRI machines will be installed at the
Volta and Central Regional Hospitals.
Basic Obstetric equipment have also been supplied and installed in selected
district hospitals and health centers across the country as part of efforts at
reducing maternal mortality.
The National Ambulance Service will take delivery of 160 ambulances this year to
augment the existing fleet.
Apart from health structures and equipments, we have established new Health
Assistant Training Schools, Nurses Training Schools, as well as Midwifery schools
in various parts of the country to train more health personnel.
Madam Speaker, with the help of the Cuban Government, 250 Ghanaian students
will benefit from medical training in Cuba.
200 of them will study for their first degree in medicine while 50 of them will
benefit from specialist training.
Government has also succeeded in reaching an agreement with the Cuban
Government to increase the yearly medical personnel quota to Ghana from 200
to 300.
Guinea Worm
Madam Speaker,
The last guinea worm case in Ghana was reported in May 2010 at Diare in the
Northern Region. We have since not heard of any.
In 2012, we will intensify our disease surveillance to make sure that guinea worm
is not re-introduced into Ghana and to also prepare Ghana for certification by the
World Health Organization as a country free of guinea worm.
ROADS
Madam Speaker,
We continue to make strides in road infrastructural development. Permit me to
highlight a few:
16 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
1. As at January 2009, the Tetteh Quarshie-Madina road was about 30%
complete. At the moment it is about 80% complete.
2. As at January 2009, funds were still being mobilized for the MadinaPantang
road. This road is now about 45% complete.
3. The Achimota-Ofankor road is now over 80% complete
4. The Koforidua bypass has been completed and is in use so has the KumasiTechiman
road
5. The Nsawam bypass, the Nkawkaw bypass, the Oforikrom-Asokwa bypass,
the first phase of the Sogakope-Adidome-Ho-Fume and the Bamboi-Tinga
road are all nearing completion.
1. Reconstruction of the Asikuma Junction-Hohoe road, the 147 kilometre
Fulfulso-Sawla road, the 60-kilometre Assin Praso-Bekwai road, the Dodi
Papaso-Nkwanta road and the Nkwanta-Oti Damanko road is on course.
Interestingly, on one of my working visits to a road construction project, one
happy resident remarked “wompewei, nawope den”!
SECURITY, LAW AND ORDER
Madam Speaker,
Because 2012 is an election year, it goes without saying that our security
institutions must be in a state of readiness to ensure peace and calm before,
during, and after the elections.
The Police, Military and other institutions charged with law enforcement will
have the fullest support of Government to act decisively and fairly.
Our commitment to ensure the safety of Ghanaians is as strong as ever.
Over the past years there has been a reduction in major crimes such as armed
robbery, car snatching, highway robbery, narcotics and murder and the law
enforcement agents are under strict instructions to sustain the arrest of narcotic
traffickers and their collaborators.
The Police
Madam Speaker,
17 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
We have increased the strength of the Police Service by over 4,000 and at the
same time taken steps to modernize its forensic facilities to assist in crime
prevention and detection.
A large quantity of vehicles, communication gadgets, bulletproof vests have been
provided to boost operational efficiency of the Police.
Immigration
Madam Speaker,
The Ghana Immigration Service is expected to complete installation of Digital
Border Surveillance System at strategically selected Border control points.
This around-the-clock monitoring equipment seeks to enhance border security
especially in the face of new sub-regional threats of religious and ethnic nature.
The Military
Madam Speaker,
The Ghana Armed Forces, in the last three years, is not in the near-moribund
state it used to be before January 2009.
A lot of acquisition has been made in equipment and hardware for the Navy and
the Air Force.
We will leave no stone unturned in our effort to develop a credible defence
system capable of protecting our Oil and Gas Industry and our territorial integrity
as a whole.
Last year, I made the point that the 48 Engineer Regiment will once again be
mainstreamed into the area of road construction and I must say that I am very
much impressed with the good job the Regiment is doing thus far.
Ayekoo to them!
Prisons Service
Madam Speaker,
18 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
This Administration last year commissioned a new medium security prison at
Ankaful; the biggest in West Africa.
Under phase two, the Ankaful prison is expected to be a model prison which will
compare with any worldwide.
The Service is also being provided with the needed logistics and manpower
resources to make it more efficient.
Fire Service
Madam Speaker,
Last year alone, the Service took delivery of 152 new vehicles to enhance
operations.
The scourge of fire outbreaks and resultant loss of lives and property remain a
source of grave concern and we are determined to reduce it to the barest
minimum.
As a way of building capacity, a number of officers and men last year received
training in the, United States, United Kingdom, Germany, and Belgium.
It goes without saying however that there is a need to enforce safety regulations
and standards and I expect the Fire Service to be fearless in that respect.
GOVERNANCE
Foreign Policy
Madam Speaker,
Continued protection of the nation’s land and maritime resources and ensuring
good neighbourliness between Ghana and her neighbours is of priority to this
Administration.
Ghana is a country with an impressive track record on fostering international
peace and we will stay on that path.
This administration will conduct our foreign relations on the basis of national
respect and good neighbourliness.
We believe in using the tools of diplomacy and existing bilateral and multilateral
structures in resolving questions of boundary disputes.
19 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
To this end, I have tasked the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources to
coordinate the activities of the Ghana Boundary Commission in pursuit of
delineating the outer limits of the continental shelf of Ghana beyond 200 nautical
miles (M) which is currently at the United Nations Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf (CLCS).
I have also instructed the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to intensify its activities in
ensuring the security and welfare of our many countrymen/women and youth all
over the world.
We have consular and moral responsibility for them all.
Youth and Sports
Madam Speaker,
On the youth front; through the Better Ghana Caravan Project we are focusing on
activities in the priority areas of employable skills, Youth Health and Sexuality
education, drug use and substance abuse education, conflict prevention,
management and resolution.
In sports, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) which had suspended the
Ghana Olympic Committee (GOC) lifted the ban last August paving the way for
Ghana’s participation in the upcoming London 2012 Olympic Games.
Ghana is to play host to the second ECOWAS Games in June this year.
At the 10th All Africa Games held in Maputo, Mozambique in September last year,
Team Ghana put up the best performance ever by winning 19 medals.
The National U-23 male football team and their U-20 female counterparts won
gold and silver respectively at the Games.
On behalf of the people of Ghana, I once again congratulate our gallant
sportsmen and women on their fine achievements
In the course of last year, the Senior National Football team, the Black Stars was
rated 14th in the FIFA world ranking and 1st in Africa.
That has so far been Ghana’s best ranking in world football.
The Black Stars did not lift the African Cup as anticipated; better luck to all of us
next time.
20 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Parliament
Madam Speaker,
I am assured that the Job 600 project will surely be completed this year and
ready for your occupation next year.
I am confident that I will be the first President to address you at a time when you
will be working from the comfort of your new offices.
This year, I hope to work with Honourable members to review three initiatives
that I announced will be instituted in the course of my Presidency.
These are the assignment of National Service personnel as Research Assistants to
MPs; the construction of constituency duty offices for Honourable members; and
the establishment of an MPs’ Constituency Development Fund separate and
apart from the District Assemblies Common Fund.
Together, we will work to find solutions to the challenges that have impacted
negatively on the agenda of the Executive and the Legislature to work in tandem
to broaden the frontiers of our democratic dispensation.
Constitutional Review Commission
Madam Speaker,
Last year, I noted in my address that the work of the Constitutional Review
Commission was on schedule.
I also noted that all governance reforms must ultimately take their ethos from
the Constitution Review Process.
I still stand by this Resolve!
I am happy to report that the Commission has since presented its Report to me
ahead of schedule and I have identified a Technical Implementation Committee
to assist Cabinet develop the white paper and begin with the implementation of
the recommendations without delay.
Madam Speaker, I hope that this House will join me in thanking the Chairman and
members of Commission for a job well done.
Corruption
Madam Speaker,
21 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Let me state here and now that I remain undaunted by attempts to thwart the
fight against corruption by legal and technical means.
I do not care whose ox is gored when it comes to the fight against corruption and
neither will I be off-tracked by all the sideline comments that are being made to
befuddle the hardcore issues.
The “Cocaine” Commission
Madam Speaker,
The fate of the abortive Ghana@50 Commission prosecutions stayed my hand in
going the route of appointing a Presidential Commission to re-open
investigations into the disappearance of cocaine from the Police vault as well as
the 77 parcels of cocaine that got mysteriously missing from the MV Benjamin
that I announced in my Address last year.
We have since identified what went wrong with the Ghana@50 Commission and
we will address it and definitely begin the cocaine investigations this year.
Indeed, as I speak, the National Security has in its custody a very key player in the
case of the 77 parcels of supposedly missing cocaine.
I have also received a report from the BNI on the results of the investigations into
the cocaine which got missing from police vaults.
I intend to get to the bottom of the matter, and I will!!!
Under my watch, Ghana will continue to be an unattractive destination for the
illicit drug trade and I feel no pain for those who are no longer benefiting from
the trade.
Justice
Madam Speaker,
In many of these matters that reflect negatively on governance, the Judiciary as
the institution of state with the mandate to dispense justice, and the Executive
with the mandate to implement the law, must act as partners engaged in a
collective effort to rid the country of corruption, drugs and other harmful
activities.
Any perception that the Judiciary is on the side of wrongdoers undermines
democracy and the institutions of democracy. 
22 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Whilst urging our Honourable Justices to live up to their noble calling of
independent arbiters, I would also like to remind them that they are an arm of
government and that they have as much responsibility as the other arms of
government in ridding the society of criminal elements, thereby ensuring justice
for the citizenry and other persons.
The 2012 Elections
Madam Speaker,
There are four critical matters that should engage our attention in this Election
Year.
The first is the Judiciary’s role in the settlement of election disputes.
The ability of the judiciary to settle election disputes expeditiously will be a big
plus for the forward march of our democracy.
The second matter is the role of the media in the elections.
Polarized or not; aligned or not; biased or not; the Ghanaian media has a
responsibility to work to preserve Ghana’s democracy.
Speaking for myself, I have confidence in the ability of my brothers and sisters in
the media to rise to the occasion.
On the perception of polarization, alignment and bias, however, the media has to
speak for itself through its deeds.
The third matter has to do with the state of industrial relations in an election
year.
It is often the case that in election years, labour demands escalate to such an
extent that they do not only create industrial tension but also ultimately prove
economically very costly to the nation.
My appeal to the tripartite partners in labour negotiations this year is for them to
have an eye on the national interest and to ensure that they create the kind of
labour environment that will engender peaceful elections and post-election
stability in the country.
The fourth is in relation to chieftaincy disputes and ethnic conflict.
We have had our fair share of these problems in parts of the country. In some
instances they have resulted in loss of lives and destruction to property. 
23 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
The Security Services have been tasked to be proactive in dealing with those who
for reasons of political expediency may want to escalate chieftaincy or ethnic
tensions.
Madam Speaker,
Whatever be the case, we expect this year’s elections to be free and fair, free
from fear, transparent and with the results acceptable to and accepted by all.
We as Government will do all in our power to support the Electoral Commission
to ensure these.
And whatever the security challenges we will not be found wanting.
The sovereign will of the people will reign supreme!
Conclusion
Madam Speaker,
I have always preached peace and I am happy the leadership of political parties
are responding to the clarion call I have sounded over the years.
I am also glad that those who did not see the need to pray for peace are now
praying for peace.
I hope however that we show proof of genuine commitment to peace by our
utterances and actions.
Let us all remember that the stability we enjoy as a country can turn instantly to
brittleness if we fail to be circumspect and if we fail to hold in check those who
may want to hold the country to ransom.
Madam Speaker,
This Government is intent on continuing with the pace of development right until
the election period.
It is true that we will have to campaign at some point in time but I promise you
this will not be at the expense of pushing the Better Ghana Agenda.
We will also not sacrifice the gains we have made on the economic front on the
altar of election year politics.
Ghana must grow; and Ghana will only grow if we take bold and courageous
decisions!
24 | S t a t e o f t h e N a t i o n A d d r e s s 2 0 1 2
Madam Speaker,
Our common yearning to see Ghana moving forward binds us as one people.
Even as we seek to promote our respective political ideologies, we must be
willing to synthesize the best ideas from both sides of the House for the
advancement of the country.
We must all be willing to put aside unnecessary partisanship and keep in mind
the big picture of how to sustain together our middle-income status through
sustainable economic development.
That will be the multi-party democracy dividend for which we all continue to toil
in the name of Mother Ghana.
Madam Speaker,
Many Honourable Members of the House have been through a hectic period of
campaigning towards Constituency primaries.
Whether you won or lost, you remain MPs and I will treasure your input at all
times.
Do not forget there is still a lot of work to be done here in the House.
I wish Members on both sides a fruitful session and may all that we do help in
building a Better Ghana.
Let us always bear in mind that as a people, we have much more common
ground than we make it seem.
Therefore let us build on the things that unite us.
Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity granted me, and look forward
with a lot of optimism to being back here in this august house next year to deliver
the State of the Nation Address.
God bless our homeland Ghana and make our nation great and strong.
I thank you for your kind attention.