1
STATE	OF	THE	NATION	ADDRESS	
PRESENTED	TO	PARLIAMENT	BY	HE	JOHN	DRAMANI	MAHAMA
PRESIDENT	OF	THE	REPUBLIC	OF	GHANA	
Thursday	February	25,	2016
Right	Honourable	Speaker
Your Excellency,	the	Vice	President
Your	Ladyship,	the	Chief	Justice
Honourable	Members of	Parliament
Honourable	Members	of	the	Judiciary
Distinguished Leaders	of	Our	Security	Forces
Excellences,	Members	of	the	Diplomatic	Corps;
Our	revered	Niimei,	Naamei,	Chiefs,	Traditional	Rulers	and	Religious	Leaders
Fellow	Ghanaians
Good	Morning.
Mr.	Speaker,
Over	the	years, I	have	often	spoken	about, and	made	reference	to,	the	tremendous	power	
that	 exists	 within every	 single	 Ghanaian - the	 power	 to	 create	 change	 and	 influence	 the	
course	of	events- the	power	to	shape	the	future	of	this	great	nation	of	ours.		
We	 are	 Ghana’s	 greatest	 wealth.	 The	 individual	 skills,	 talents,	 passion,	 personality,	 ideas	
and	ingenuity	we	bring	can	make	a	world	of	difference.
When	 we	 lose	 someone,	 especially	 someone	 who	 is	 in	 the	 prime	 of	 his	 or	 her	 life,	 we	
mourn much	more than	what	 that	person	was to	us,	or	meant	 to	us. We	also	mourn	 the	
possibility	of	what	that	person	might	have	been	or	could	have	accomplished.		
Mr.	Speaker,
Every	year	since	the	good	people	of	Ghana	elected	me	to	serve	as	President, I	have	come	
to	this	august	House	in	fulfilment	of	Article	67	of	the	Constitution	of	the	Republic	of	Ghana	
to	address	the	state	of	our	nation.
In	many	ways,	because	I	began	as	a	Member	of	Parliament,	this	House	is	my	political	home	
and	its	honourable	members	are my	brothers	and	sisters.	We	stood	on	different	sides	and	
held	our	positions.	We	argued	points,	and	we	pointed	out	what	we	felt	was	the	error	of	the	
other side’s	 ways.	 But,	 as	 I	 recall, at	 the	 end	 of	 the	 day,	 we	 were	 more	 than	 worthy	
opponents.	 We	 recognised	 ourselves	 as	 family,	 as	 a	 microcosm	 of	 the	 larger	 Ghanaian
family.
Mr.	Speaker,	
It	 pains	 me	 today	 to	 see	 the	 vacant	 seat	 of	 our	 brother,	 my	 friend,	 Honourable	 J.B.
Danquah-Adu,	MP	for	Abuakwa	North.	J.B.,	aged	50, when	he	was	brutally	murdered,	was	a	
gentleman	who	walked	away	from	every	conversation	with	a	smile.		
2
He	genuinely	loved	Ghana	and	that	devotion	shone through	in	everything	he	did,	especially	
in	 his	 constituency,	 where	 he	 was	 quite	 popular	 and	 well	 regarded. JB’s	 absence	 in	 this	
House	and	in	his	constituency	is	both	seen	and	felt.	We	have	lost	a	member	of	our	family.	
And	Ghana has	lost	a	true	son,	one	who	would	no	doubt	have	gone	on	to	contribute	greatly	
to	the	betterment	of	our	nation.		
I	would	like,	on	behalf	of	the	good	people	of	Ghana	and	of	all	those	present	today,	to	offer	
our	 deepest	 condolences	 to	 his	 wife	 and	 family;	 and	 to	 Mr.	 Frank	 Adu	 and	 Mr.	 George	
Twum-Barimah-Adu,	brothers	of	Honourable	JB	Danquah-Adu,	who	are	here	in	Parliament
today.
I	would	also	like	to	respectfully	request	that	we	take	a	full	minute	of	silence	to	honour	him.	
Let	 us	 also	 honour	 our	 compatriots	 who	 passed	 away	 during	 last	 week’s	 Metro	 Mass	
Transit	Bus	accident.
May	their souls rest	in	perfect	peace.
Thank	you.
*	*	*
PUTTING	PEOPLE	FIRST
Mr.	Speaker,
My	Government	is	committed	to	putting	people	first.	I	have	said	that	again	and	again	over	
the	last	several	years, but	what	 does	 that	 really	mean?	How	is	 that	 declaration	affecting	
the lives	of	people	in	Bawku,	Aflao,	or	Axim?		
We	 politicians	 are	 known	 for	 talking	 a	 lot,	 yet	 the	 irony	 of	 such	 a stereotype	 is	 that	 in	
actual	 fact, words	often	 fail	us.	They fail	to	convey	the	numerous	ways	in	which	what	we	
are	 doing	 is	 directly	 impacting	 the	 lives	 of	 those	we	are	 serving.	And	 that	 is	 because	we	
speak	in	ways	 that	sometimes	take	 the	very	subjects	of	our	concerns	and	 turn	 them	into	
objects,	or	place	them	in	demographics,	or	speak	of	them	as	statistics.		
We	detail projects	and	proposals, we	cite	budgets	and	data,	figures	and	bottom	lines	that	
can	feel	very	far	removed	from	the	flesh	and	blood	realities	of	the	people	whose	lives	we	
seek	to	improve.
Mr.	Speaker,
In	 this	 address	 on	 the	 state	 of	 the	 nation,	 I	 would	 like	 to	show	 the	 direct	 line	 between	
policy	and	people.	I	would	like	to	show	how	the	seeds	we	have	been	planting	for the	last	
three	years	have	taken	root	and	grown.	Some	have	now	become	trees	bearing	 fruits that	
are ripe	 for picking.	And	many	more	 are	 fast	 approaching	maturity,	 preparing	 to	 display	
their	gifts.
3
EDUCATION
Mr.	Speaker,
I	would	like	to	show	how	we	are	changing	lives.	And	what	a	better	place	to	start	than	with	
education,	which	has	been	proven	to	be	the	single	most	effective	way	not	only	to	change	a	
single	life,	but	other	lives	that	surround	it.		
Education	can	break	cycles	of	poverty	and	abuse.	Education	is	the	key	that	can	unlock, for	
children, worlds	 into	 which	 their	 parents	 could	 not	 enter; worlds	 they	 never	 even	 knew	
existed.	
During	this	term,	my	first	term	as	President,	we	have	consciously	developed	strategies	and	
made	 interventions	 to	 raise	 the	 quality	 of	 education	 by	 emphasising	 its	 relevance,	
improving	access,	and	working	to	eliminate	gender	discrimination	and	inequality.	We	have	
also	worked	to	better	train	and	equip our	teachers.
BASIC	EDUCATION
Mr.	Speaker,	
Ghana	 has	 been	 commended	 by	 the	 United	 Nations	 for	 meeting	 the	 target	 of	 the	
Millennium	 Development	 Goal	 (MDG)	 on achieving	 universal	 primary education	 with	
gender	parity.	Despite	that	achievement,	there	are	still	a	significant	number	of	school-age
children	that	are	not	enrolled.		
These	 children	 are	 now being	 targeted	 under	 the	 Compulsory	 Basic	 Education	 (CBE)	
programme	of	 the	Ministry	of	Education.	In	 the	last	year,	a	 total	of	 54,800 out	of	 school	
children	 in	 four	 regions	 have	 been	 enrolled into	 schools. These	 are	 54,800	 children	 who	
would	 not	 have	received	 an	 education. These	 are	 54,800	 children	 whose	 lives	 will	 now	
have	much	different	outcomes	as	a result of	this	programme.	
Other	important	social	interventions	that	are	being	implemented	in	the	educational sector	
include	the	issuance	of	free	supplies such	as	uniforms,	sandals	and	textbooks.
In	 June	 2015,	 I	 launched	 the	free	school	sandals	 programme which	 saw	 the	start	 of	 the	
distribution	 of	 10,000	 Kumasi	 Shoe	 Factory	 Made-in-Ghana	 leather	 sandals	 to	 school	
children	in	need	across	the	nation.		
A	 number	 of	 students	 would	 have	 struggled	 without	 the	 basic	 necessities with	 which	 to	
attend	school - students	like	Mohammed Awabu	of	Moglaa	JHS	in	the	Savelugu	District	of
the	 Northern	 Region	 who	 received	 free	 sandals;	 or	 David	 Aminayire	 of	 Nayagenia	 JHS,	
Kassena-Nankana	 Municipal	 in	 the	 Upper	 East	 Region	 who	 received	 free	 uniform, free	
exercise	books	and	textbooks.
Last	 year, I	 insisted	 that	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Education	 must	 ensure	 that	 all	 textbooks	 are	
printed	in	Ghana.	This	is	on	course.	In	 fact,	I	would	like	 to	acknowledge	 the	statement	of	
gratitude	 received	 from	 the	Ghana	Printers	and	Paper	Converters	Association,	led	by	Mr.	
James	Appiah-Berko.		
4
I	would	especially	like	to	take	note	of	their	indication	that	this	intervention	will	help create	
1,400	new	direct	jobs.	Better	still, that is 1,400	new	direct	jobs	in Ghanaian	businesses.
Mr.	Speaker,
In	 our	 determination	 to	 improve	 quality	 education,	 we	 have	 also	 introduced	 two	 new	
programmes - the	 Teacher	 Professional	 Development Initiative and the Provision	 of	
Teaching	and	Learning	Materials	programme.
The	Teacher	 Professional	Development	 initiative	aims	 to	achieve a	 target	 of	 95%	 trained	
teachers	 at	 the	 basic	 level	 by	 2020	 as	 set	 out	 in	 the	 Education	 Strategic	 Plan	 (ESP). The	
Provision	 of	 Teaching	 and	 Learning	 Materials	 (TLMs)	 programme has	 seen	 to	 the	
distribution	of	teaching	and	learning	materials	to	10,924	basic	schools.	
In	 addition,	 30,000	 teachers were	 trained	 in	ICT	 under	 the	 Basic	 School	 Computerisation	
Programme,	 bringing	 the	 total	 number	 of	 teachers	 trained	 under	 the	 programme	 to	
50,000.
SECONDARY	EDUCATION
Mr.	Speaker,
Secondary	 education	 was	 plagued	 with	 a	 number	 of	 challenges,	 notably lack	 of	 access,	
leading	 to	 a	 poor	 transition	 rate	 from	 JHS	 to	 SHS.	 We	 are	 vigorously	 confronting	 these	
challenges. Under	our	programme	 to	establish	 200	Senior	High	Schools,	I	can	 report	 that	
123	 are	 currently	 being	 constructed.	 But	 permit	 me	 to	 place	 this	 project	 in	 a	 broader	
perspective.		
The	first	secondary	school	was	established	in	Ghana	140	years ago,	in	1876.		Between	that	
date	 and	 2012,	 the	 number	 of	 public	 secondary	 schools	 established	 was	 526.	 The	 123	
schools	that	are	being	implemented	right	now	will	create	more	than	200,000	new	places	in	
the	 system,	 thus	 making	 the	 Community	 Day	 Schools	 Intervention	 the	 biggest	 ever	
expansion	programme	in	the	entire	history	of	secondary	education	in	Ghana.	
It	 is	 because	 of	 this	 programme that	 16-year-old Apim	 Shulamite	 is	 now	 the	 Assistant	
School	 Prefect	 of	 the	 Atta	Mills	 Community	 Day	 School	 in	 Otuam. After	 completing	 JHS,	
Apim,	who	once	dreamt	of	becoming	a	nurse, had	 to	stay	home	 for	a	year	due	 to	lack	of	
access	to	a	secondary	school.	Apim’s	parents	are	settlers	from	Somanya.	Her	father	is	a	taxi	
driver	and	her	mother	sells	second-hand	clothing.		
During the	 year	 that	 she	 stayed	 at	 home,	 Apim	 sold	 waakye	 and	 worked	 in	 a	 chop	 bar.
Because	 of	 the	 Community	 Day	 Schools	 intervention,	 students	 like	 Apim	 are	 able	 to	 go	
from	 limited	 prospects	 to	 the	 fulfilment	 of	 personal	 dreams	 that	 ultimately	 benefit	 the	
entire	nation.
Additionally,	 under	 the	 Secondary	 Education	 Improvement	 Programme	 (SEIP),	 10,400	
students benefitted	 from	 scholarships.	 60%	 of	 the	 beneficiaries	 are	 young	 women,	 like	
Gertrude	Ahyia	Yeboah,	who	is	currently	a	student	at	St.	Augustine’s	SHS	in	Bogoso	in	the	
Western	Region.
5
TERTIARY	EDUCATION
Mr.	Speaker,
Enrolment	 in	 tertiary	 institutions	 increased	 by	 6.3%	 for	 Universities	 and	 8.9%	 for	
Polytechnics.
In	November	of	last	year,	I	inaugurated	the	main	campus	of	the	University	for	Health	and	
Allied	Sciences	 (UHAS)	at	Ho,	which,	in	just	three	years	of	its	establishment,	has achieved	
many	 remarkable	 success	 stories. So	 far	 more	 than	 2,300	 students	 have	 been	 enrolled.		
Associated	with	the	enrolment	is	also	the	creation	of	816	direct	jobs	for	teaching	and	nonteaching
staff	of	UHAS.	But	those	are	just	numbers.		
Let	me	 tell	you	about	one	of	 those	2,300	students: Dzidzor	Kwamuar from	Fodome-Helu.
She	lost	her	mum	when	she	was	10	years	old.	When	she	counted	herself	along	with	her	13	
siblings,	 those	 being her	 father’s	 children,	 there	 didn’t	 seem	 to	 be	 any	 hope	 of	 standing	
out.	Thankfully,	an	uncle	took	care	of	her	through	JHS	and	SHS.	She	was	admitted	to	Aburi	
Girls	and	completed	her	studies	there	in	2014	only	to	find	that	despite	being	qualified,	she	
could	not	attend	medical	school	due	to	inadequate	access.		
Now,	with	 the	opening	of	 the	University	 for	Health	and	Allied	Sciences,	Dzidzor	is	indeed	
standing	 out.	 This	 access	 has	 made	 a	 tremendous	 difference	 in	 her	 life,	 and	 it	 will	 also	
make	a	difference in	the	lives	of	Dzidzor’s	future	patients.
Mr.	Speaker,
Progress	has	been	made	at	 the	University	of	Energy	and	Natural	Resources,	which	has	so	
far	admitted	2,685	students	and	created	315	teaching	and	non-teaching	jobs.
The	 bill	 for	 the	 establishment	 of	 the	 University	 of	 Environment	 and	 Sustainable	
Development	has	been	passed	and	I	have	appointed	an	implementation	team	to	assist	the	
Ministry	of	Education	in	realising	this	vision.	In	fulfilment	of	our	pledge	to	ensure	that	each	
region	in	Ghana	has	at	least one	public	university,	we	are	on	course	to	begin	construction	
this	year	at	Donkokrom	in	the	Afram	Plains	and	Somanya,	all	in	the	Eastern	Region.
Mr.	Speaker,
In	 furtherance	 of	 our	 policy	 to	 convert	polytechnics	 to	 technical	 universities,	 six	(6)	have	
met the	16-point	criteria	and	have	been	recommended	for	immediate	conversion.	They	are	
the	Kumasi,	Accra,	Koforidua,	Ho,	Sunyani,	and	Takoradi Polytechnics.		
The	remaining	four	polytechnics	will	be	assisted	by	a	special	arrangement	to	support	them	
with	 infrastructure,	 equipment	 and	 the	 strengthening	 of	 their	 governance	 structure	 to	
enable	them	meet	the	conversion	criteria	in	the	shortest	possible	time.	
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 abolition	 of	 the	 quota	 system	 for	 enrolment	 in	 colleges	 of	 education	 has increased	
admissions	by	63	per cent.
6
This	 has	 created	 access	 for	 many	 students	 who	 otherwise	 would	 not	 have	 had	 the	
opportunity.	 To	 assist	 teacher	 trainees	 and	 finance	 their	 education,	 following	 the	
cancellation	 of	 the	 teacher	 trainee	allowances,	I	 have	asked	 the	Ministry	 of	Education	 to	
direct	the	Student	Loan	Trust	to	register	trainees	on	their	campuses	and	disburse	student	
loans	to	them.
This	new	system	allows	us	to	reinvest	in	the	education	of	the	next	generation	of	teachers	
and	students.
To	fulfil the	policy	of	providing	Colleges	of	Education	in	under-served	areas	and	to	expand	
access	 to	 teacher	 training,	Government	is	absorbing	into	 the	 public	 stream	 the	 following	
colleges -
! Saint	Ambrose	College	of	Education,	Dormaa	District
! Al-Farak	 College	 of	 Education,	 Wenchi	 District - this	 will	 become	 our	 first	 ever	
Islamic	College	of	Education
! Gambaga	College	of	Education,	East	Mamprusi	District
! St.	Vincent	College	of Education,	Yendi	Municipality
! Bia	Lamplighter	College	of	Education,	Bia	District.
Two	other	private	colleges	will	be	absorbed	in	the	Brong	Ahafo	and	Ashanti	Regions	to	fulfil
the	initiative	of	providing	a	college	of	education	in	under-served	areas.	In	addition,	work	
will	begin	on	three	new	Colleges	in	the	Greater	Accra,	Central	and	Northern	Regions.
Mr.	Speaker,
Last	year,	we	worked	to	improve	the skills	of	in-service	teachers. In	2016,	we	are	going	one	
step	 further	 by	enhancing	 the	education	 of	 pre-service	 teachers	 by	giving	 them	 the	 skills	
and	 tools	 they	 need	 to	excel	in	 the	 classroom,	and	 prepare	 our	 children	 for	a	 bright	and	
prosperous	future.		
We	 are	 doing	 this	 through	 the	 Transforming	 Teacher	 Education	 and	 Learning	 (T-TEL)	
Programme,	 which	 aims	 to	 impact	 35,000	 teachers	 over	 four	 years.	 Central	 to	 achieving	
this	are	the	38	Colleges	of	Education.
7
HEALTH
Mr.	Speaker,
At	Independence, life	expectancy	was	47	years. Today,	life	expectancy	has	increased	by	14	
years.	This	increase	is	due	to	advances	in	medicine,	improvements	in	health	infrastructure
and	 increased numbers	 of	 health	 personnel.	 Not	 only	 are	 we	 living	 longer in	 our	 adult	
years,	more	infants	are	living	to	see	those	years.		
According	to	the	Ghana	Demographic	and	Health	Survey,	there	has	been	a	drastic	decrease	
in	 the	 rates	of	infant	mortality	and	under-five	mortality. Over	 the	last	decade,	under-five	
mortality	has	decreased	 from	111	to	60	per	1,000	live	births. Infant	mortality	dropped	by	
almost	30%	from	64	to	41	per	1,000	live	births	during	the	same	period.	
The	 mothers	 of	 these	 children	 are	 also	 surviving	 during	 pregnancy	 and	 after	 childbirth	
because	antenatal	and	intra	partum	and	postnatal	care	have	improved.
EFFICIENT	HEALTH	FINANCING
Mr.	Speaker,
We	are	poised	to	invest	heavily	in	the	coming	years	in	education	and	preventive	healthcare	
for	 the	 treatment	 of	 chronic	 diseases	 due	 to	 lifestyle	 choices- diseases	 such	 as	
Hypertension,	Diabetes,	High	Blood	Cholesterol,	and	Obesity.	The	investment	in	preventive	
health	is	even	more	prudent	as	our	nutritional	habits	continue	to	change.
Mr.	Speaker,
The	double	burden	of	communicable	and	non-communicable diseases	raises	an	even	more	
fundamental	 question	 about	 sustainable	 healthcare	 financing. This	 is	 precisely	 why	 I	
constituted	 a	 Technical	 Committee	 to	 make	 proposals	 that	 will	 lead	 to	 a	 fundamental	
redesign	of	the	National	Health	Insurance	Scheme.		
2015 saw	an	active	NHIS	membership	of	11.2	million	(41%	of	the	population).		Outpatient	
Utilisation	 of	 the	 National	 Health	 Insurance	 Scheme	 rose	 to	 29.6million	 in	 2014	 from	
597,000	 in	 2005. For us,	 this	 undeniable	 pattern	 of	 increased	 utilisation	 of	 healthcare
insurance	bears	ample	testimony	to	the	confidence	that	our	population	continues	to	have	
both	in	the	Scheme	and	in	the	health	system.		
It	is	also	the	reason	why	questions	about	the	adequacy	of	the	funding mechanisms	cannot	
be	ignored. To	this	end,	Government	expects	the	team	of	technical	experts	to	propose	for	
Government’s	consideration, fundamental	reforms	that	will	touch	on	areas	such	as	equity,	
premiums,	and	expansion of	the	revenue	base,	fraud,	benefit	packages	and	procurement	of	
medications.
Mr.	Speaker,
I	 want	 to	 make	 medication	 affordable	 for	 all	 Ghanaians. That	 is	 why	 I	 want	 our	 local	
Pharmaceutical	Companies	to	produce	as	much medication	as possible	right	here	in	Ghana.	
To	that	end,	we	have	disbursed	more	than	GH¢50million	cedis	to	assist	them	in doing	so.		
8
Through	 this,	we	hope	 to	achieve	an	uninterrupted	supply	of	anti-retroviral	drugs	 for	HIV	
and	AIDS	 patients. There	are	also	innumerable	 other	associated	 benefits	 to	 this	 strategy,	
not	least	of	which	is	the	creation	of	more	jobs	in	Ghanaian	companies.
We	have	here	with	us	today,	Samuel	Amo	Tobbin,	the	Executive	Chairman	of	the	Tobinco	
Group,	which	was	one	of	the	companies	that	benefitted	from	Government’s	support	to	the	
pharmaceutical	industry.		
The	funds	were	disbursed	through	the	Export	Development	and	Agriculture	Industrial Fund
(EDAIF). With	the	support	received,	Tobinco	has	also	increased	its production	portfolio	by	
150%.	The	company	produces	analgesics,	antibiotics,	antiretroviral and	various	syrups for	
the	local	market	and	also	for	export	to	Niger,	Gambia,	Sierra	Leone	and	Liberia.
Mr.	Speaker,
One	cannot	speak	of	health	without speaking	of	physical	exercise. There	is	a	need	to	return
Physical	Education	or	Sports	to	the	school	curriculum. The	current	situation	where	PE	and	
Sports	has	been	de-emphasised	in	 the	academic	curriculum	is,	in	 the	long	 run,	extremely	
costly.	It	directly	impacts	the	health	outcomes	of	students	in	the	area	of	obesity	and	other	
such	illnesses	that	arise	from	a	sedentary	lifestyle.		
It	is	very	easy to	see	that	the	benefits	far	outweigh	the	costs. I	have	asked	the	Ministers	of	
Education,	 Health	 and	 Sports	 to	 initiate	 stakeholder	 discussions	 to	 ensure	 the	 adequate	
reintegration	of	Sports	back	into	the	school	system.
Mr.	Speaker,
In	October	of	last	year, 12	people	in	the	West	Gonja	District	in	the	Northern	Region were	
affected	by	Yellow	Fever. In	December	of	last	year, there	was	an	outbreak	of	Pneumococcal	
meningitis	 that	 started	 in	 the	 Brong	 Ahafo	 region.	 These remind us	 that	 public	 health	
emergencies	are not	to	be	taken	lightly. They	are	an	ever-present	possibility.
Ghana	has	been	commended	numerous	times	by	the	international	community	for	being	on	
the	frontlines	during	the	Ebola	crisis. As	others	were	standing	still	or,	worse,	stepping	back	
because	of	fear,	we	stepped	forward	and	took	control	of	the	situation,	helping	to	mobilise	
efforts	that	ultimately	helped	contain	the	virus.
The	World	Health	Organisation	 has	declared	 the	 Zika	 virus	a	 Public	Health	Emergency	 of	
International	 Concern.	 Numerous	 cases	 of	 the	 virus	 have	 been	 reported	 in	 Brazil,	 the	
United	States	and	other	countries	in	the	Americas,	as	well	as in	parts	of	Europe	and	Africa.
The	 Ministry	 of	 Health,	 acting	 through	 its	 agencies	 has	 started	 coordinating	 public	
education	programmes	on	the	prevention	of	the	Zika	virus.		
The	Ministry	is	also	keeping	health	facilities	on	alert	with	timely	messages	on	transmission	
patterns,	 associated	 signs	 and	 symptoms,	 methods	 of	 prevention	 and	 emergency	
preparedness	planning.	
9
I	assure	the	people	of	Ghana that Government	is	fully	prepared	and	equipped	to	deal	with	
this	and	any	other	public	health	issue	that	might	arise.		
HEALTH	INFRASTRUCTURE	
FOR	BETTER	HEALTHCARE
Mr.	Speaker,
Our	 healthcare	 system	 has	improved	 tremendously. We	 continue	 to	invest	 heavily	in	the	
sector	 to	ensure	 an	even	 better	 system	 because	 as	 a	 social	 democratic	Government,	 we	
believe	that	a	healthy	people	make	a	wealthy	nation.
It	is	for	this	core	reason	that	over	the	past	few	years	we	have	invested	over	US$2billion	in	
health	infrastructure, equipment	and	human	resource.	We	project	to	add	6,000	more	beds	
to	Ghana’s	existing	stock	by	the	end	of	2018 when	the	programme	is completed.	
Presently,	 there	 are	 two	 Teaching	 Hospitals,	 three	 Institutional	 Hospitals,	 four	 Regional	
Hospitals,	 fourteen District	Hospitals,	dozens	of	Polyclinics	and	Health	Centres,	as	well	as	
hundreds	of	CHPS	compound	projects	all	at	various	stages	of	completion.
Mr.	Speaker,
Construction	of	the	University	Hospital	at	Legon,	upgrading	and	rehabilitation	of	the	Ridge	
Hospital,	 and	 the	 second	 phase	 of	 the	 Tamale	 Teaching	 Hospital	 expansion	 project	 are	
progressing	steadily.
The	Wa	Regional	Hospital	which	commenced in	October	2012	is	presently	70%	complete. It	
is	part	of	the	US$339million,	8-hospitals	project.
Work	on	the	following	hospitals	is	also	progressing:		
! 250-bed	Regional	Hospital	in	Kumasi-Sewua
! 60-bed	District	Hospital	in	Salaga
! 60-bed District	Hospital	in	Tepa
! 60-bed	District	Hospital	in	Nsawkaw
! 60-bed	District	Hospital	in	Konongo-Odumasi
! 100-bed	Municipal	Hospital	in	Atomic-Accra.
Rehabilitation	of	 the	295-bed	Bolgatanga	Hospital is	progressing	 satisfactorily. Work	on	a
new	modern	Emergency	Department	for	the	Korle-bu	Teaching	Hospital	is	90%	completed.
A	12-bed	intensive	care	unit	(ICU)	for	the	department	of	surgery	has	been	refurbished	and	
equipped.
Six	district	hospitals with	integrated	IT	 systems	are	currently	being	designed,	constructed	
and	 equipped	 at	 an	 estimated	 cost	 of	US$175	 million. The	 beneficiary	 communities	 are	
Sekondi-Takoradi,	 Abetifi	 District,	 Garu	 District,	 Kumawu	 District,	 Fomena	 District	 and	
Dodowa	District.
Mr.	Speaker,	
10
I	 have	 requested the	 Minister	 for	 Health	 to	 convert	 the	 Volta	 Regional	 Hospital	 into	 a	
modern	 Teaching	 Hospital	 befitting the	 status	 of	 a	 University	 hospital	 for	 use	 by	 the
University	of	Health	and	Allied Sciences	in	the	Volta	Region.
The	 continuation	 of	 the	 US$264million	 National	 Medical	 Equipment	 Replacement	
Programme	which	has,	so	far,	provided	diagnostic	and	treatment	equipment	for	over	150	
hospitals	nationwide	will	ensure	adequate	provision	for	the	much-needed	retooling	of	the	
Regional	Hospital	in	the	Volta	Region.
Mr.	Speaker,
We	 are	 training	 more	 health	 care	 professionals. We	 are	 improving	 on	 the	 conditions	 of	
their	 service	 so	 that	 we	 may retain	 them	 to	 work	 in	 Ghana.	 Umar	 Mahmoud	 Mogtar	
worked	as	a	farm	hand,	but	he	had	always	dreamt of	becoming	a	health	professional.	His	
opportunity	came	when	a	health-training institute	was	opened	in	Lawra	in	the	Upper	West	
Region	and	now	he	is	on	course	to	realise	his	dream.
We	are	providing	and	building	a	better	health	infrastructure	and	providing	more	modern	
equipment	to	meet	the	current	and	future	needs	of	our	population and	people, like	Mercy	
Pomaa,	 who	 gave	 birth	 at	 the	 Nkrankwanta	 Polyclinic	 in	 January	 of	 this	 year,	 because	
Mercy’s	previous	pregnancy	went	through	Caesarean	section.
Her	 condition	 with	 this	 pregnancy	 was	 delicate,	 one	 that	 could	 ordinarily	 only	 be	
undertaken	 by	 a	 higher-level	 healthcare	 facility.	 Having	 access	 to	 a	 capable	 and	 wellequipped
 polyclinic	 nearby	 decreased	 the	 travel	 time	 necessary	 for	 Mercy to	 access	
medical	attention	throughout	the	pregnancy	and,	also,	when	it	came	to	time	to	deliver,	the	
establishment	of	a	new	polyclinic	in	Nkrankwanta	ensured	that	she	delivered	safely.
Today	 she	is	a	 proud	mother	of	a safe	and	 sound	baby	because	a	modern	 polyclinic	was	
built	in	her	community.	
Stories	like	this	should	be	ordinary	and	expected,	not	exemplary,	and	we	are	working	hard	
to	make	it	so. I	firmly	believe	that	Ghana’s	health	system	has	been	placed	permanently	on	
the	 right	 trajectory,	 and	 that	 it	 will	 be	 the	 healthcare	 system	 that	 other	 nations	 on	 the	
African	continent	will	emulate	and	strive	to	duplicate.
Mr.	Speaker,
The	Ghana	AIDS	Commission	has	successfully	coordinated	implementation	of	the	National	
HIV	and	AIDS	Strategic	Plan	2011-2015. Adult	HIV	prevalence	has	stabilised	over	the	past	3	
years.	 The	 current	 prevalence	 of	 1.4%	 reflects	 declining	 new	 HIV	 infections	 and	 reduced	
morbidity	and	mortality	among	Persons	Living	with	HIV.	
Through	targeted	prevention	strategies,	new	HIV	infections	have	declined.	We	have	seen	a	
consistent	 reduction	 in	 new	 HIV	 infections	 from	 a	 baseline	 of	 16,200	 new	 infections	 to	
11,356	in	2014.	A	30%	decline	over	the	past	5	years.
11
We	 have	 been	 successful	 in	 reducing	 annual	 AIDS deaths	 by	 43%.	 Through	 collaborative	
efforts	to	eliminate	Mother-to-Child	Transmission	of	HIV	with	advocacy	at	the	highest	level,	
we	have	achieved	over	50%	reduction	of	transmission	of	HIV	from	mother-to-child. 81%	of	
pregnant	 women	 receive	 PMTCT	 services.	 66%	 of	 infected	 pregnant	 women	 receive	
treatment	to	prevent	mother-to-child	transmission	of	HIV.
The	 prevalence	 of	HIV	 among	exposed	 babies	 has	 reduced	 drastically	 to	 8%	 at	 birth	 and	
21%	after	breastfeeding;	down	from	32%.
The	 Ghana	 AIDS	 Commission	 and its	 stakeholders	 have	 agreed	 on	 priorities	 for	 the	 new	
National	 Strategic	 Plan	 2016-2020	 towards	 achieving	 the	 90-90-90	 fast-track	 targets	 for	
Ghana	(90%	of	PLHIV	know	their	status,	90%	of	PLHIV	on	Antiretroviral	treatment	and	90%	
achieve	immune	suppression).	
These	priorities	include	strengthening	of	strategic	information	and	health	systems,	as	well	
as	 community	 empowerment	 to	 scale	 up	 HIV	 testing,	 treatment	 and	 targeted	 behaviour	
change.	We	will	strive	to	eliminate	mother-to-child	transmission	of	HIV	by 2017	and	meet	
the	needs	of	adolescents	and	youth.
12
SOCIAL	PROTECTION
Mr.	Speaker,
We	 recognise	 that	 while	 carrying	 out	 structural	 reforms	 to	 achieve	 fiscal	 stability,	 many	
vulnerable	 families	 and	 households	 that	 are	 below	 the	 poverty	 line,	 could	 suffer	 further	
deterioration	in	their	quality	of	life.	For	this	reason,	Government	takes	its	social	protection	
policies	very	seriously.	
We	 have	made	 remarkable	gains	in	 the	Gender, Children	and	Social	 Protection	 sector	 by	
strengthening	the	legal	and	policy	framework,	effectively	mainstreaming	gender	concerns,	
and	increasing	child	rights	protection.
Cabinet	has	approved	five	important	policies	to	strengthen	our	Gender,	Children	and	Social	
Protection	programmes - the	Child	and	Family	Welfare	Policy;	the	National	Gender	Policy;	
the	Social	Protection	Policy;	the	Justice	for	Children	Policy	and	the	School	Feeding	Policy.
Other	 critical	 pieces	 of	 legislation	 designed	 to	 strengthen	 our	 social	 protection	
programmes,	 such	 as	 the	 Affirmative	 Action	 Bill,	 the	 Ageing	 Bill,	 the	 Domestic	 Violence	
Regulations,	Adoption	and	Foster	Care	Regulations,	have	all	been	 finalised	and	validated.	
These	Bills	and	the	Regulations	will	be	presented	to	this	House this	year, to	be	enacted	into	
law.					
In	addition,	we	are	also	implementing	programmes	 to	protect	 the	elderly.	The	new	EBAN	
card	introduced	by	the	Ministry	has	gained	acceptance	in	many	institutions,	and	the	elderly	
who	present	 the	cards	at	bus	 stations,	banks,	hospitals	and	other	public	places	are	given	
priority	in	order	of	service.	So	far,	over	14,000	cards	have	been	issued	in	7	regions,	with	the	
Ministry	 of	 Gender, Children	 and	 Social	 Protection	 set	 to	 issue	 an	 additional	 9,000	 to	
conclude	the	first	phase.
Mr.	Speaker,
We	also	continue	to	work	to	improve	the	opportunities	available	to	persons	with	disability.	
It	 has	 been	 proven	 over	and	 over	again	 that	 “disability	 is	 not	 inability.”	Our	Minister	 for	
Chieftaincy	and	Traditional	Affairs,	Dr.	Seidu	Danaa,	is	a	living	testimony	of the	veracity	of	
this	 statement.	 He	 performs	 his	 duties	 just	 as	 effectively	 as	 the	 other	 members	 of	 my	
Cabinet.	
Mr.	Ivor	Greenstreet,	 for	many	years	General	Secretary	of the	CPP,	and	now	Presidential	
Candidate	of	the	party,	is	also	a	testament	to	the	fact	that	disability	should	not	be	allowed	
to	be	a	bar	to	achievement.
It	is	estimated	that	persons	with	one	form	of	disability or	other	constitute	roughly	10%	of	
our	population,	meaning	that	about 2.6	million	of	our	compatriots	fall	into	this	category.	I	
am	of	the	opinion	that	marginalisation	of	such	a	huge	segment	of	the	population	is	not	only	
unconscionable	and	impractical,	but	also unwise.
Many	 governmental	 and	 charity	 institutions	 are	 providing	 skills	 training	 for	 persons	 with	
disability to	improve	their	opportunities	in	the	world	of	work.	
13
Under	the	Skills	Development	Fund	(SDF), support	has	been	provided	to	the	Ghana	Society	
for	the	Physically	Disabled	to	procure	a	modern	automated	chalk	moulding	plant	in	order	
to	enhance	the	production	of	chalk	at	their	factory.	This	support	will	allow	the	organisation	
to	meet	the	standard	required	by	the	Ghana	Education	Service.	
Training	was	also	provided	for	the	Lakeside	Cross	Disability	Self-Help	Group	by	the	Animal	
Research	Division	of	CSIR in	animal	husbandry,	with	the	aim	of	enhancing	their livelihoods.	
To	 create	 further	 opportunities	 for	 persons	 with	 disability,	 I	 have	 requested	 that	 the	
Administrator	of	the	District	Assemblies	Common	Fund	(DACF) increase	the	disability	grant	
from	 2%	 to	 3%;	 a	 50%	 increase	 for	 the	 current	 fiscal	 year.	 This	 formula	 is	 soon	 to	 be	
presented	to	the	members	of	this	House	for	your approval.
The	 moratorium	 for	 disabled	 access	 to	 public	 buildings	 pursuant	 to	 the	 Persons	 with	
Disability	 Act	 of	 2006	 expires	 this	 year.	 The	 National	 Council	 on	 Persons	 with	 Disability	
(NCPD)	 has	 developed	 the	Ghana	 Standards	 on	 Accessibility	Designs	 for	 implementation.	
This	will	enable	owners	of	public	buildings	to	provide	accessibility	to	buildings	for	disabled	
persons.
Mr.	Speaker,	
Last	year,	on	July	23,	I	became	the	first	sitting	president	to	pay	a	formal	visit	to	a	Ghanaian	
prison.	Joining	the	Prison	Council,	officers	and	inmates	of	Nsawam	for	the	launch	of	Project	
Efiase,	opened	my	eyes	to	the	deplorable	conditions	that	exist	in	our	prisons.	As	a	followup
 to	 my	 visit,	 the	 Prisons	 Council	 is	 working	 on	 a	 new block	 at	 Nsawam	 specifically	
designed	to	decongest	the	prison,	for	which	construction	will	begin	this	year.	
Mr.	Speaker,	
In	order	to	empower	head	porters – kayayei - and	reduce	their	vulnerability,	we	have	set	
up	coordinated	gender-based	response	centres	at	Mallam	Atta	and	Agbogbloshie	markets	
as	a	pilot	to	provide	humanitarian	support,	counselling services,	and	psycho-social	support	
to	kayayei and	market	women.	We	have	also	 registered	a	1,000	of	 the	kayayei	 free	onto	
the	NHIS	 in	 order	 to	 enable	 them	 access	 quality	 healthcare.	 In	 addition, a	micro-finance	
credit	programme	for	alternative	livelihoods	for	market	porters	will	also	be	launched.
Mr.	Speaker,	
Government	progressively	expanded	the	Livelihood	Empowerment	Against	Poverty	(LEAP)	
programme	from	1,640	beneficiary	households	in	2008,	to	71,000	in January	2013.	
As	 at November	 2015,	 LEAP	 had been	expanded	 to	 144,980	 beneficiary	households.	The	
cash	grants	 have	also	 been	 increased	 this	 year.	This	 has	 helped	 beneficiaries	 to	 not	 only	
address	 their	 critical	 needs,	 but	 also to	 invest	 in	 income-generating	 ventures	 that	
supplement	family	finances. I	will	share	with	you	two	such	examples	of	this.
42-year	 old	 LEAP	 beneficiary	 Zenabu	 Sumaila,	 from	 Ninkogo	 in	 the	 Pusiga	 district	 of	 the	
Upper	 East	 region,	 has	 invested	 her	 grant	 into	 pig	 farming. Before	 that, she	 had	 no	
meaningful	 source	of	livelihood.	Zenabu used	 to	help	her	husband	 tend	a	 small	 farm	but	
when	he	died, it	threw	her	and	her	two	children	into	abject	poverty.
14
She	 had	 to	 rely	 on	 the	kindness	 of	 the	people	in	 her	 community	 for	virtually	everything.		
Even	the	Chief	assisted	her	in	feeding	her	household.		
The	lack	of	an	income	source	also	meant	that	her	children	could	not	attend	school	regularly
and	the	family	could	not	afford	healthcare. After	receiving	her	cash	grants	on	a	number	of	
occasions,	Zenabu	started	saving	and	she	invested	in	animal	rearing.		She	started	with	one	
piglet	and	she	now	has	more	than	ten.
She	has	been	able	to	supplement	her	cash	grants	with	income	generated	from	selling the	
piglets. She	is	now able	to	buy	enough	food	for	her	household.	Her	children	are	attending	
school	regularly	and	by	virtue	of	being	a	LEAP	beneficiary,	Zenabu	was	also	able	to	register	
on	the	National	health	Insurance	Scheme	free	of	charge.
Another	LEAP	beneficiary,	Awenemi	Apogyanga,	from	Sumbrungu	Kulbia	in	the	Bolgatanga	
Municipality,	 proved	 to	 be	 just	 as	enterprising.	 	A	 widow,	 Awenemi	 used	 to	 try	 to	make	
ends	meet	by	using	the	loom that	she	owned	to	weave	kente. The	money	this	brought	in	
was	not	enough	to	sustain	her	household	so	her	children	would	skip	school	to	do	part-time	
work	to	make	enough	money	to	buy	material	so	she	could	sew	and	sell	more	kente.
With	 the	assistance	 of	 the	 LEAP	 Programme,	Awenemi	 procured	a	weaving	machine and	
she	 is	 now able	 to	 afford	 the	 material	 in	 order	 to	 make	 kente,	 which	 she	 then	sells	 to	
smock	makers	at	Bolga. Her	children	no	longer	have	to	abandon	school	to	help	earn	money	
for	the	household.
Mr.	Speaker,
These	are	living	testimonies	of	how	people’s	lives	are	changed.
15
YOUTH
Mr.	Speaker,
To	 ensure	 the	 smooth	 implementation	 of	 the	 National	 Youth	 Policy,	 in	 January	 2015, I	
launched	the	National	Youth	Policy	Implementation	Plan. The	Plan	provides	an	accelerated	
framework	 with	 specific	 timelines	 for	 the	 adoption	 of	 programmes	 and	 activities	 in	 the	
policy	document.
The	country’s	Youth	Leadership	and	Skills	Training	Institutes	trained	a	total	of	1,646	youth	
under	a	Vocational	and	Skills	Training	programme.
Mr.	Speaker,	
The	Youth	Employment	Act	2015	has	been	passed	to	create	a	solid	foundation	upon	which	
the	 Youth	 Employment	 Agency	 can	 be	 structured	 and	 run. Recruitment	 under	 the	 Youth	
Employment	 Agency	 (YEA)	 has	 also	 started, and	 it	 is	 targeted	 to	 recruit 100,000	 young	
people	over	the	next	12	months	in	5	different	modules.
The new	Youth	Employment	Agency	is	implementing	a	purely	cashless	organisation	where	
all	financial	transactions	will	be	electronic	or	by	cheque.
Mr.	Speaker,	
The	Youth	Enterprise	Support	 (YES)	initiative	made	 significant	 progress	in	 the	year	 under	
review. A total	 of	 2,048	 applications	 were	 received	 in	 response	 to	 its	 first	 call,	 and	 107	
individuals	were	selected	for	financial	and	technical	support.	Out	of	the	107	beneficiaries,	
81	were	earmarked	to	receive	financial	support	and	26	to	receive	technical	support.
The	progress	of	all	beneficiaries	is	closely	monitored	by	the	YES	business	support	team	and	
the	YES	monitoring	and	evaluation	desk	through	mandatory	reporting	and	regular	business	
site	visits	and	audits.
That	first	call	under	YES	has	created	over	800	direct	and	indirect	jobs	for	Ghanaian	youths.	
The	 second	 call	 for	 applications	 was	 made	 in	 January	 this	 year	 and	 so	 far	 about	 4,000	
applications	have	been	received. I	urge	our	youth	to	take	advantage	of	this	initiative.
Mr.	Speaker,
One	growing	area	of	opportunity	for	our	youth	is	in	ICT	services	and	applications.	In	the	last	
few	 years	 we	 have	 made	 significant	 progress	 in	 entrepreneurship	 support	 and	 the	
incubation	of	programmes. These	serve	as	foundations	for	a	strong	digital	ICT	market.	
A	 number	 of	 interventions	 are	 being	 implemented,	 including	 mLabs,	 iHubs,	 Accra	 BPO	
Center,	Kumasi	Business	Incubator,	Regional	Innovation	Centers	and	the	ICT	Park	in	Tema	
to	 boost	 the	 innovation	 ecosystem	 and	 enhance	 digital	 opportunities	 and	
entrepreneurship.
16
SPORTS
Mr.	Speaker,
In	 addition	 to	 the	 construction	 of	 the	 Cape	 Coast	 Sports	 Stadium,	 which	 has	 been	
completed and	 which	 I	 shall	 have	 the	 privilege	 of	 commissioning	 soon, we	 have	 also	
completed	 the	 drawings	and	 bills	 of	 quantities	 for	 the	 construction	 of	 the	New	Edubiase	
Sports	Stadium.
Last	September,	Ghana	participated	in	the	2015	All	Africa	Games	held	in	Congo	Brazzaville
and	won	a	total	of	19	medals.	Our	women’s	football	team	must	be	particularly	commended	
for	winning	the	football	trophy.
The	 Senior	 National	 Football	 Team,	 the	 Black	 Stars	 placed	 second	 in	 the	 African	 Nations	
Cup	tournament	held	in	Equatorial	Guinea	in	January	2015,	and	the	Black	Satellites	placed	
third	in	the	Orange	African	U-20	Cup	of	Nations	Tournament	that	was	held	in	Senegal	this	
year.
Mr. Speaker,
Government	commits to	the	implementation	of	the	findings	and	recommendations	of	the	
World	Cup	Commission	even	as	we	confront	the	legal	hurdles	ahead.
A	new	boxing	gym	and	sports	complex	being	built	by	SSNIT	near	the	Korle	Lagoon,	will	be	
commissioned	this	year.	This	will	give	opportunity	to	the	young	people	in	Bukom	and	other	
surrounding	areas	who	have	a	talent	for	boxing	to	realise	their	dreams.
*	*	*
17
BUILDING	A	STRONG	AND	RESILIENT	ECONOMY	
Mr.	Speaker,	
When	I	took	office	as	President	our	economy	was	faced	with	severe	challenges from	both	
domestic	policy	misalignment	and	external	shocks.	The	resulting	effect	was	a	budget	deficit	
of	 11.5	%	 of	GDP	and	a	 current	account	 deficit	 of	 11.7%	 of	GDP.	 	Expenditure	 pressures	
emanating	largely	from	the	compensation	of	public	sector	employees,	budgetary	overruns,	
shortfalls	in	corporate	income	tax	and	low	Development	Partners’	inflow	accounted	for	the	
high	fiscal	deficit.		
On	 the	 other	 hand,	 developments	 in	 commodity	 prices	 and	 a	 tightening	 of	 financing	 for	
middle	income	countries	jointly	contributed	to	the	high	current	account	deficit.		
At	the	time	of	our	Independence,	the	Agriculture	sector	accounted	for	about	50%	of	GDP.		
It	currently	accounts	for	about	21.5%	of	GDP.	The	Services	sector	is,	right	now,	the	largest	
sector	 with	 slightly	 over	 50%	 share	 of	 GDP. Following	 it	 is	 the	 industrial	 sector,	 which	
accounts	for	about	26.6%	of	GDP.
Despite,	this	significant	shift	in	the	structure	of	the	economy,	the	nature	of	our	exports	has	
virtually	 remained	 the	 same.	We	 have	 a	 narrow	 base	 of	 export	 commodities	 and	 a	 high	
dependence	on	imports.	This	situation	has	subjected	our	economy	to	shocks	in	the	face	of	
global	price	volatilities.	
In	fact,	we	have	witnessed	a	simultaneous	fall	in	crude	oil,	cocoa	and	gold	prices.	The	price	
of	a	barrel	of	crude	oil	has	fallen	by	more	than	70%	since	June	2014,	and	as	it	stands	today,	
Brent	crude	oil	is	selling	at	around	US$33	per	barrel	from	a	high	of	US$	100	per	barrel.	This	
is	the	lowest	since	2004.	Even	though	cocoa	and	gold	prices	have	had	a	significant	effect	on	
the	 balance	 of	 payments	and	 tax	 revenue,	 the	 oil	 decline	 is	a	mixed	 bag	 that	 favourably	
supports	 crude	 oil	 import	 bill	 but	 affects	 negatively	 the	 Annual	 Budget	 Funding	 Amount	
(ABFA) of	the	budget.	
This	explains	 the	 revision	 of	 the	 2015	 original	 budget by	 the	 supplementary	 budget	 that	
was	presented	to	this	august	House	on	21st July	2015.
Over	 the	last	 few	years,	we	have	 taken	significant	measures	 to	address	 the	 real	sector	of	
the	 economy.	 As	 a	 first	 step,	 we	 started	 to	 diversify	 our	 economy	 by	 intensifying	 valueaddition
 to	our	exports.	For	example,	in	August	2015,	 the	Minister	 for	Lands	and	Natural	
Resources	inaugurated	a	US$7	million	gold	refinery	at	Adjiriganor	in	Accra,	the	second	of	its	
kind	in	Ghana.	
Sahara	 Royal	 Gold	 Refinery	 Limited	 has	 the	 capacity	 to	 refine	 between	 200-300	 kilos	 of	
gold	 daily,	 and	 the	 expectation	 is	 that	 the	 growing	 number	 of	 licensed	 gold	 buyers	 who	
have	 traditionally	 purchased	 raw	minerals	 from	Ghana	and	 have	exported	 them	 to	 other	
countries	will	seek	to	refine	the	gold	right	here	in	Ghana,	creating	jobs	and	therefore	aiding	
inclusive	growth.	Assistance	to	the	KNUST	Jewellery	School	is	also	aimed	at	training	a	core	
of	craftsmen	to	kick-start	the	jewellery	industry	in	Ghana.			
18
Additionally	as	part	of	our	agenda	to	achieve	a value-added	and	export-led	economy,	the	
Ghana	 Export	 and	 Import	 Bank	 (EXIM)	 Bill	 has	 been	 laid	 before	 Parliament.	 The	 primary	
purpose	is	to	finance	exports	(notably	light	industrial	and	agricultural	products);	guarantee	
loans;	provide	export	insurance;	support	SMEs	and	other	businesses;	and,	strengthen	our	
access	to	markets	under	economic	cooperation	programmes	such	as	the	Africa	Growth	and	
Opportunity	Act	(AGOA)	and	Economic	Partnership	Agreements	(EPAs).	
The	operations	of	the	Bank	will	support	the	nurturing	and	growth	of	the	private	sector	in	
Ghana	and	address	the	longstanding	problem	of	access	to	credit	for	expanding	value-added	
exports.	I	intend	to	sign	this	bill	into	law	as	soon	as	this	House	passes	it	because	I	believe	it	
will	underscore	Ghana’s	story	of	transformation.
Our	second	strategy	has	been	to	invest	heavily	in	building	a	transformative	infrastructure.	
As	 an	 emerging	 middle-income	 country,	 with	 a	 growing	 middle-class,	 this	 will	 form	 the	
basis	of	a	new	growth	trajectory	in	the	economy,	generating	jobs	and	increasing	incomes.	
In	 furtherance	 to this, it	 was	 decided	 to	 create	 strong	 institutions	 that	 would	 help	 us	
achieve	our	goal.	
As	with	the	Exim	Bank,	the	Ghana	Infrastructure	Investment	Fund	(GIIF)	was	established	for	
similar	purpose.	These	institutions	will	serve	as	buffers	 for	managing	the	economy,	whilst	
providing	 the	space	 for	spending	on	socio-economic	infrastructure.	The	Ghana	Exim	Bank	
and	 the	 Ghana	 Infrastructure	 Fund	 are	 some	 of	 the	 more	 enduring	 and	 independent	
mechanisms for	addressing	the	root	causes	of	our	particular	macro-economic	challenges.		
Government	 has	 additionally	 deployed	 a	 new	 debt	 management	 strategy	 that	 includes	
making	commercial	projects	pay	for	the	loans	that	are	procured	to	complete	such	projects.	
Government	 benefited	 tremendously	 from	 the	 outcome	 of	 the	 ‘Senchi	 Consensus’;	
suggestions	 from	enthusiastic	 stakeholders	 led	 to	 the	 validation	 of	 a	Home	Grown	 Fiscal	
Consolidation	Plan	which	was	eventually	presented	to	this	august	House	for	consideration.	
Specific	interventions	included	major	public	financial	management	reforms	in	the	areas	of	
budgeting,	accounting,	revenue	administration,	wage	management,	debt	management	and	
other	structural	reforms.
The	 primary	 goals	 of	 this	 coordinated	 policy	 were	 to	 stabilise	 the	 economy,	 facilitate	
inclusive	growth,	protect	social	spending	and	create	decent	jobs. On	the	basis	of	this	plan, I	
took	 the	decision	 to	enter	into	 the	IMF	Extended	Credit	Facility	 (ECF)	Programme	 to	give	
credibility	to	our	policies.	Our	commitment	to	the	implementation	of	the	programme	has	
led	to	two	successful	reviews	under	the	IMF	Programme	in	2015,	and	a	third	review	due	in	
April	of	this	year.	
This	 year, Ghana	 is	 expected	 to	 achieve	 a	 budget	 deficit	 of	 5.3%	 of	 GDP	 under	 the	 IMF	
Extended	 Credit	 Facility (ECF)	 programme,	 which	 provides	 a	 tighter	 fiscal	 space	 than	
anticipated	 in	 the	 original	 programme.	It	 is	 within	 this	 context	 that	 we	must	 practice	 an	
even	greater	degree	of	fiscal	prudence	in	2016.	
19
The	 bane	 of	 our	economic	management	 has	 been	 the	 cyclical	 huge	election	 year	 budget	
deficits.	 	 It	 is	 an	 unfavourable	 narrative	 for	 which	 Ghana	 has	 become	 famous.	 	 I	 have	
assured	 the	 nation	 and	 our	 partners	 that	 my	 administration	 will	 exercise	 strict	 fiscal	
discipline	 even	 in	 this	 election	 year	 in	 order	 that	 we can	 also	 transform	 this	 negative	
narrative of	our	country.
This	has	not	been	an	easy	road	 to	 travel.	As	President,	I	swore	an	oath	 to	act	in	 the	best	
interest	of	our	nation. Acting	in	a	nation’s	best	interest	is	not	synonymous	with	taking	only	
decisions	that	make	one	popular. I	thank	the	good	people	of	Ghana	for	your	understanding	
and	patience	during	these	challenging	times	that	we	have	endured.	The	sacrifices	we	have	
made, place	our	economy	back	on	a	path	of	growth,	and	make	it	more	resilient	even	in	a
volatile	global	financial	environment.
Working	 together	 we	 have	 chalked	 major	 achievements	 in	 our	 economic	 management	
journey	so	far.
We	 have	 contained	 the	 unsustainable	 utility	 and	 fuel	 subsidy	 overruns	 by	 implementing	
the	automatic	price	adjustments	of	petroleum	and	utility	prices	that	took	effect	in	July	and	
December	 2015,	 respectively.	 The	 implication	 has	 been	 a	 minimal	 budgeted	 amount	 of	
about	 GH¢50	 million	 for	 the	 2015	 budget	 and	 provisional	 outturn	 relatively	 lower	 than	
provided	for.		
Considering that	in	 the	past,	Government	has	had	cause	 to	spend	over	GH¢1.0	billion	 for	
overruns	in	subsidies,	it	makes	 this	an	uneasy	 feat	 for	any	Government	 to	achieve	at	 this	
time.
For	 the	 first	 time	 in	 many	 years,	 negotiation	 with	 our	 Trade	 Unions within	 budget	
constraint	 before	 the	 2016	 budget	 has	 been	 achieved.	 We	 acknowledge	 the	 enormous	
support	 from	 Organized	 Labour	 and	 our	 Trade	 Union	 Partners	 who	 have	 shown	
understanding	on	the	need	to	achieve	fiscal	consolidation.	
In	 the	 same	 vein,	 we	 have	 had	human	resource	 and	 payroll	 system	 upgrades	 and	 audits	
with	a	major	policy	of	a	net	freeze	on	employment	in	some	public	sectors	excluding	health	
and	 education.	 The	 effect	 has	 been	 a	 reduction	 in	 the	 wage	 to	GDP	 ratio	 from	 8.9	 %	 in	
2012	to	7.9%	in	2015;	and	as	a	percentage	of	tax	revenue,	a	reduction	from	53.3%	in	2012	
to	 43.6	 %	 in	 2015	 as	 well	 as	 success	 in	 migrating	 staff	 onto	 the	 Single	 Spine	 Salary	
Structure.	It	is	expected	that	with	the	stability	achieved	negotiations	for	base	pay	for	next	
year	will	commence	in	April	this	year.
Our	 investment	 in	 the	 energy	 sector	 has	 started	 bearing	 fruit.	 With	 the	 support	 of	
Honourable	 Members	 of	 Parliament,	 we	 have	 amended	 the	 Petroleum	 Revenue	
Management	Act	to	reflect	our	current	policy	stance.	We	are	witnessing	increased	inward	
investment	into	Ghana’s	oil	and	gas	sector	despite	the	current	low	price	on	global	markets.	
We	intend	to	clean	up	the	financial	challenges	that	have	affected	the	viability	of	the	SOEs	
in	the	energy	sector.	
20
MICRO	FINANCE	COMPANIES
Mr.	Speaker,
Over	 the past	 5	 years	 there	 has	 been	 a	 proliferation	 of	 microfinance	 companies.	 These	
companies	come	under	the	direct	supervision	of	the	Bank	of	Ghana.	Unfortunately, lack	of	
effective	supervision	has	resulted	in	many	cases	in	which	micro	finance	companies	licensed	
by	 Bank	 of	Ghana	 have	 breached	 the	 rules	 and	 created	 supposed	 pyramid	 schemes	 that	
have	eventually	come	crashing	down.	
One	 such	 case	 is	 DKM.	 DKM,	 with	 the	 super	 high	 interest	 rates	 of	 between	 50	 and	 55%	
promised,	is	believed	to	have	caused	a	loss to	its	clients	in	excess	of	GH¢77	million.	Many	
depositors	have	lost	their	livelihood.	While	our	laws	place	this	matter	squarely	in	Bank	of	
Ghana’s	ambit,	Government	has	a	concern	for	the	poor	unsuspecting	Ghanaian	clients	who	
deserve	to	have	been	protected	by	a	more	robust	inspection	and	supervisory	regime	by	the	
Central	Bank.
I	am	aware	that	the	Bank	of	Ghana	has	commenced	liquidation	proceedings	in	respect	of	
DKM.	I	believe	that	this	process	should	be	part	of	a	comprehensive	package	that	looks	at	
protection	of	the	livelihoods	of	especially	small	depositors	without	rewarding	the	reckless	
conduct	of	 the	microfinance	institution,	in	 this	case	DKM.	The	object	of	 this	would	be	 to	
look	at	reimbursing	legitimate	customers	their	original	deposit	amounts, and	not	the	Alicein-Wonderland
prospects	they	were	expecting.	
This	 initiative	 should	 be	 conceived	 in	 the	 context	 of	 a	 broader	 solution	 that	 will	
permanently	 sanitise	 and	 restore	 credibility	 to	 the	microfinance	 industry	 and	 strengthen	
Bank	of	Ghana’s supervision.	
Mr.	Speaker,
This	august	House	has	a	role	to	play.	We	must	fast	track	the	Ghana	Deposit	Protection	Bill,
which	will protect	small	depositors	funds	in	similar	situations like	this in	future.	
Mr.	Speaker,
In	 the	 Energy	 Sector,	 Government	 in	 2013	 formulated the	 Local	 Content	 and	 Local	
Participation	 Policy.	 Approximately	 7,000	 people	 have	 been	 employed	 in	 the	 upstream	
sector	of	the	Oil	and	Gas	Industry - 5,590	Ghanaians	and	1,350	expatriates.	Out	of	the	474	
companies	registered	with	the	Petroleum	Commission,	321	are	indigenous	companies	and	
46	are	joint	ventures.	
Out	of	 the	 total	value	of	US$6.3	billion	contracts	awarded	 from	2010	 to	2015,	over	US$1	
billion	 went	 to	 indigenous	 companies. Specifically, as	 at	 the	 third	 quarter	 of	 2015,	
$201,072,785.62	representing	41%	of	the	total	of	$792,623,122.73	worth	of	investment	for	
the	year	was	awarded	to	indigenous	companies.
On	 the	downstream,	our	vision	is	 to	create	Ghana	as	a	hub	 for	petroleum	distribution	in	
the	sub-region.	Already	BOST	has	begun	supplying	petroleum	products	to	the	land-locked	
countries	of	Burkina	Faso,	Niger	and	Mali	from	their	Bolgatanga Depot.	
21
TOR,	I	am	pleased	to	announce,	is	operational	and	is	poised	to	resume	its	strategic	role	in	
petroleum	production	in	Ghana.	
Mr.	Speaker,	
I	 salute	 the	Acting.	MD	and	 the	 staff	of	 the	 refinery	 for	 the	 hard	work	and	 sacrifice	 they	
have	 made	 to	 bring	 the	 refinery	 back	 on	 stream.	 The	 staff	 voluntarily	 took	 an	
unprecedented	 20%	 pay	 cut	 as	 their	 contribution to putting	 TOR	 back	 on	 its	 feet.	 The	
Chairman	of	the	workers’	union	and	some	of	his	staff	are	here	with	us	today.	I	salute	you.
ENDING	‘DUMSOR’
Mr.	Speaker,
A	year	ago,	I	stood	before	this	august	House	and	promised	to	 fix	the	power	sector	deficit	
that,	at	the	time,	had	become	a	significant	constraint	to	economic	growth	and	was	a	major	
disruption	 in	 the	 lives	 of	 Ghanaians,	 both	 at	 home	 and	 at	 work.	 This	 was	 a	 time	 of	
considerable	national	anxiety.	
A	 huge	 deficit	 in	 power	 generation	 had	 resulted	 in	 prolonged	 rationing.	 I	 was	 painfully	
aware	of	the	difficulties	this	situation	was	posing.		Ghanaians	had	to	put	up	with	long	hours	
of	 darkness	 or	 spend	money	 on	expensive	 fuel	 to	 run	 their	 generators.	 Businesses	 faced	
serious	disruption	or	saw	their	cost	go	up	if	they	had	to	operate	on	generators.	I	expressed	
my	deep	regret	to	the	nation	over	the	situation	and	took	responsibility	as	President, leader	
of	this	nation and	Commander	in	Chief.
It	 has	 been	 a	 year	 of	 hard	 work	 and	 negotiations.	 We	 have	 achieved	 the	 fastest	
mobilisation	of	power	in	the	history	of	Ghana.	About	800MW	of	power	has	been	added	to	
our	 generation	 within	 the	 shortest	 period	 of	 time.	 Finalising	 and	 commissioning	 KTPP	
220MW,	 Commissioning	TICO	 combined	 cycle	 110MW,	mobilising	 Karpower	 220MW and	
Ameri	250MW	have	added	extra	power	to	our	transmission	grid.	
180	MW	of	Asogli	phase	II	is	also	available	as	soon	as	we	can	get	extra	gas	for	it.	
Much	work	still	needs	to	be	done	to	give	us	the	comfort	of	sustainable	generation.	
I	salute	 the	 former	Minister	of	Power	Dr.	Kwabena	Donkor,	Deputy	Minister	John	Jinapor	
and	 their	 team	of	 technical	people.	Minister	Emmanuel	Armah	Buah	and	his	 team	at	 the	
Ministry	 of	 Petroleum,	 and	 I	 acknowledge	 the	 Chief	 Executive	 and	 Staff	 of	 the	 PURC,	
Energy	Commission,	VRA,	GRIDCO,	ECG,	GNPC,	Ghana	Gas	Co.	Ltd,	Ministry	of	Finance,	and	
the	 Attorney	 General’s	 Department.	 It	 has	 taken	 teamwork	 and	 cooperation	 of	 many	
people	to	achieve	this.
Much	of	our	power	is	based	on	thermal	generation	now.	Akosombo	is	currently	producing	
at	about	40%	capacity.	All	our	hydro	resources	are	strained	because	of	the	low	level	of	the	
Volta	Lake	caused	by	a	changing	climate.	More	thermal	generation	means we	have	had	to	
pay	 more	 in	 tariffs	 to	 maintain	 sustainable	 power.	 I	 wish	 to	 thank	 Ghanaians	 for	 your	
patience	and	understanding.	I	pledge	 to	Ghanaians	 that	I	will	continue	 to	work	 to	ensure	
that	we	never	find	ourselves	in	such	a	dreadful	situation ever	again.	
22
Mr.	Speaker,
To	ensure	we	never	end	up	there	again, we	must	add	even	more	generation	to	keep	ahead	
of	a	robust	growth	of	almost	12%	increase	in	demand	per	annum. Planned	power	based	on	
MOUs and	Power	Purchase	Agreements	signed, project	an	addition	to	generation	of	about	
3,500MW by	 2010.	 This	 will	 ensure	 Ghana’s	 power	 security	 and	 position	 Ghana	 as	 the	
power	hub	of	West	Africa.
Mr.	Speaker,	
In this	term,	and	my	next	term,	I	intend	to	work	hard	to	achieve	this	objective.	Additional	
power	into	the	grid	will	aim	at	diversifying	fuel	sources,	from	gas	to	crude	oil,	LPG	and	LNG.	
Additionally, there	 will	 be	 an	 injection	 of	 renewable	energy.	 	 Currently	Ghana	 has	 about	
25MW of	 solar	 power	 being	transmitted	 into the	national	 grid.	 This	 is	 set	 to	 increase	 to	
about	200MW over	the	next	4	years.	
Already	 several	 small	 and	 medium	 enterprises	 have	 been	 provided	 with	 rooftop	 solar	
following	 my	 announcement	 of	 a	 target	 of	 200,000	 rooftop	 solar	 projects	 for	 small	
businesses	and	residential	users.	Some	of	the	micro	enterprises	connected	include:
! Young	Dollar	Barbering	shop	(Maamobi),
! Alice	Skills	Training	Center for	Hairdressers	(Trade	Fair),
! Dara	Beauty	Parlor	(South	Labadi),
! Renee	Designs	(Nima),
! Emmacansey	Tailoring	(Alajo),	and
! Mercy	Fashion	(Lashibi).	
The	 Ministry	 of	 Power,	 working	 with	 the	 PURC	 and Energy	 Commission, will	 intensify	
implementation	nationwide	in	order	to	achieve	the	target of	200,000.
African	Plantations	 for	Sustainable	Development	 (APSD)	is	also	poised	 to	pump	60MW of	
biomass	energy	into	the	transmission,	following	the	signing	of	a	PPA	with	ECG.	Government	
is	also	initiating	this	year, a	programme	to	substitute	incandescent	and	CFL	bulbs	with	LED	
bulbs.
The	Ministries	of	Finance	and	Power	are	finalising	processes	for	the	implementation	of	the	
Private	Sector	Participation	 (PSP)	programme	 for	 the	Electricity	Company	of	Ghana	 (ECG)	
Limited.
Mr.	Speaker,	
In	anticipation	of tariffs	being	paid	by	all,	the	Electricity	Company	of	Ghana,	is	undergoing	
corporate	 re-organisation	 to	make	 its	 operations	more	 responsive	 to	 customers’	 desires.	
The	 strategic	 focus	 is	 to	 improve	general	 customer	 service	 delivery,	 response	 time	when	
attending	to	faults	and	customer	complaints,	staff	attitudes	and	professional	competence.
ECG	 is	 on	 course	 to	 increase	 pre-payment	 metering	 coverage	 by	 which	 time	 a	 total	 of	
400,000	prepayment	meters	should	be	installed.	
23
Cabinet	 has	 approved	 the	Millennium	 Challenge	 Compact	 II’s	US$498m	 grant,	 which	 will	
provide	a	major	boost	in	addressing	energy	efficiency	problems	as	well	as	improving	access	
to	energy.
Mr.	Speaker,
In	2015,	 several	major	power	distribution	network	projects	were	completed	while	others	
reached	 an	 advanced	 stage	 of	 work.	 Even	 as	 we	 worked	 round	 the	 clock	 to	 bring	 load	
shedding to	an	end,	we	were	also	vigorously	working	to	bring	electricity	to	as	many	of	our	
people	as	possible.	When	I	appeared	before	you	last	year,	76%	of	our	people	had	access	to	
electricity. As	I	speak,	80.5%	of	our	people	now	enjoy	access	to	electricity.	This	compares	
significantly	with	the	58%	of	coverage	in	2009. And	the	difference	this	has	made	in	the	lives	
of	the	people	in	these	communities	is	monumental.
Shirazu	Issaku	is	a	vulcaniser.	He operates	at	 the	Fufulso-Junction,	located	in	 the	 Central	
Gonja	 District	 of	 the	 Northern	 Region. It	 is	 on the	 main	 Kintampo-Tamale	 road. Shirazu,	
realising	 the	 strategic	 location	 of	 the	 Fufulso-Junction,	 as	 an	 intersection	 between	 the	
Northern,	Upper	West	and	Brong	Ahafo	Regions,	as	well	as	 the	heavy	vehicular	 traffic	on	
the	 route	 from	 landlocked	 countries	 like	 Burkina	 Faso	 and	 Niger,	 established	 a	 small	
vulcanising	shop	there	in	the	early	90s.
Until	 the	 extension	 of	 electricity	 to	 Fufulso-Junction	 in	 2015, Shirazu	 had	 to	 depend	 on	
diesel	to	run	his	generator enduring the	hazardous	effects	of	the	smoke.	The	extension	of	
electricity	 to	 the	 town	 has	 changed	 his life	 drastically.	 Today,	 not	 only	 does	 he	 have	
dependable,	reliable	and	sustainable	energy	for	his	business,	he	is	also	able	to	work	in	the	
night.	
Other	traders	in	the	village	are	also	benefiting	from	his	enterprise.	Kenkey	seller,	Afishata,	
also	 takes	 advantage	 of	 the	 presence	 of	 drivers	 there	 to	 sell	 the	 now-popular	 Fufulso	
kenkey	and	fish	to	drivers and	passengers	who	stop	to	make	use	of	the	vulcanising	services.	
Today, trading	is	booming	in	the	town,	both	day	and	night,	as	a	result	of	the	installation	of	
streetlights.
With	 this	massive	expansion	 in	 coverage,	I	 wish	 to	 urge	 the	 Energy	 Commission	 and the	
general	public	 to	work	 together	 to	implement	energy	conservation	programmes	with	 the	
view	to	reducing	our	tariffs	and	also	ensuring	judicious	use	of	power.
FINANCIAL	VIABILITY	OF	POWER	
COMPANIES	FOR	EFFECTIVE	SERVICE
Mr.	Speaker,
All	these	gains	will	be	undermined	if	the	issue	of	financial	viability	of	our	utility	companies	
is	 not	 addressed.	 For	 nearly	 two	 decades,	 our	 power	 sector	 companies	 have	 piled	 on	
astronomical	debts	that	have	severely	impeded	their	ability	to	perform	at	optimum	level.	It	
is	a mark	of	their	resilience	and	commitment	to	the	national	cause	that	they	have	survived	
till	date.	
24
Together,	Volta	 River	Authority	 (VRA),	Ghana	Grid	 Company	 (GRIDCO)	and	 the	Electricity	
Company	 of	 Ghana	 (ECG)	 owe	 colossal	 amounts of	 billions	 of	 cedis.	 These	 debts	 are	
referred	to	as	“legacy	debts”	because	they	have	not	recently	been	accumulated;	they	have	
been	building	up	for	close	to	two	decades.		
While	it	is	true	that	there	have	been	periodic	upward	adjustments	in	tariffs	over	the	years,	
the	amount	of	tariffs	paid	have	not	been	adequate	to	meet	the	operational	expenditures	of	
these	utilities.	For	example,	the	VRA	produces	electricity	at	an	average	rate	of	32cents	per	
kilowatt-hour and	sells	same	to	ECG	at	21cents	per	kilowatt-hour.	The	shortfall	in	revenue	
has traditionally	been paid	through	the	payment	of	subsidies	by	Government.	
Mr.	Speaker,
The	reality	is	that	while	some	subsidies	have	been	paid	over	the	years,	perennial	budgetary	
constraints	 and	 numerous	 competing	 demands	 have	 made	 it	 virtually	 impossible	 for	
successive	Governments	to	meet	this	obligation. It	is	therefore	obvious	that	the	operations	
of	these	power	utilities	cannot	be	sustained	if	nothing	is	done	to	arrest	the	situation.
The	 situation	 that	 we	 are	 faced	 with	 requires	 very	 difficult	 but	 necessary	 measures	 to	
sustain	these	vital	utility	companies.	The	alternative	to	not	acting	would	be	a	total	collapse	
of	the	power	sector,	and	the	consequences	would	be	too	catastrophic	to	imagine.
It	is	on	the	basis	of	this	that	we	placed	the	Energy	Sector	Levy	Bill	before	this	august	House	
in	December	2015,	and	 for	which	we	 received	your	gracious	approval. If	we	were	 to	 free	
the	credit	lines	of	the	utility	companies	by	ring-fencing	and	paying-off	the	legacy	debt,	we	
would	 be	 putting	 them	 back	 in	 a	 better	 position	 to	 provide	 us	 with	 reliable	 sustainable	
power.
As	President,	I	did	not	take	this	decision	lightly,	knowing	the	implications	for	the	budgets	of	
many	 households.	 It	 was,	 however,	 the	 only	 option	 available	 after	 all	 others	 had	 been	
evaluated.	Leaders	 sometimes	are	called	upon	 to	make	 tough	decisions,	 decisions whose	
overall	benefits	outweigh	their	initial	difficulties,	and	the	Energy	Sector	Levy	is	one	of	those	
types	of	decisions I	had	to	take.		
It	 is	 a	 measure	 whose	 benefit	 will	 become	 apparent	sooner	 rather	 than	 later.	 I	 deeply	
regret	 any	 hardship	 this	 may	 have	 caused	 but	 if	 we	 are	 to	 fix	 our	 energy	 challenges	
permanently	then	this	decision	was	absolutely	imperative.
DIVERSIFYING	THE	ECONOMY	(COFFEE)
Mr.	Speaker,
As	 part	 of	 efforts	 to	 diversify	 sources	 of	 national	 revenue	 as	 well	 as	 provide additional	
income	to	farmers,	the	Government,	through	the	Ghana	Cocoa	Board,	intends	to	increase	
Ghana’s	annual	coffee	production	 from	 the	current	level	of	about	6,000	metric	 tonnes	 to	
100,000	metric	tonnes	in	the	short	to	medium	term.	
Production	of	coffee	in	Ghana	has	been	low,	ranging	from	a	peak	of	6,700	metric	tonnes	in	
the	mid-1960s	to	a	low	of	1,140	metric	tonnes	in	2009.
25
Government	support	 for	COCOBOD’s	Pilot	Coffee	Rehabilitation	Project	instituted	in	2010	
resulted	in	a	gradual	increase	in	production	to	6,000	metric	tonnes	by	2015.
Government	 is	 promoting	 coffee	 cultivation	 in	 areas	 considered	 as	 marginal	 for	 cocoa	
production.	Coffee	 thrives	very	well	in	areas	with	rainfall	ranging	between	1200-2000mm	
per	annum	but	can	also	grow	in	areas	with	a	minimum	of	1000mm	rainfall	per	annum	with	
irrigation.	
Parts	of	the	Volta,	Eastern,	Central	and	the	transitional	areas	of	Ashanti	and	Brong	Ahafo	
Regions	 such	 as	 Techiman,	Wenchi,	 Bechem,	 Nkoranza,	 Atebubu,	 Kwame	 Danso,	 Drobo,	
Akomadan,	Offinso,	Jamasi,	Mampong-Ashanti,	Kete	Krachi,	Dambai	are	being	targeted	for	
aggressive	promotion	of	the	cultivation	of	coffee.
The	 Cocoa	 Research	Institute	 of	Ghana	 has	 developed	 high-yield	 varieties	 of	 coffee	 that,	
under	good	management,	start	bearing	in	2-3	years	after	planting,	with	average	yields	of	2-
3	metric	tons	per	hectare.	With	a	projected	planted	area	of	100,000	hectares	over	the	next	
six	 years,	 it	 is	 estimated	 that	 from	 2021,	 about	 100,000	 metric	 tonnes	 of	 coffee	 can	 be	
produced	annually	which	will	subsequently	increase	 to	about	200,000	metric	 tonnes	over	
the	next	decade.
Mr.	Speaker,
This	year,	five	million	improved,	early	maturing	and	high	yielding	coffee	seedlings	are	being	
raised	 and	 supplied	 to	 farmers.	 This	 number	 will	 be	 substantially	 increased	 annually	 to	
ensure	that	we	achieve	the 100,000	hectares	of	coffee	 farms	in	the	targeted	locations	by	
2021.	 The	 efforts	 being	 made	 to	 increase	 coffee	 production	 will	 be	 backed	 with	 readily	
available	marketing	channels	for	farmers.	
COCOA
Mr.	Speaker,
Let	 me	 state	 for	 the	 avoidance	 of	 doubt	 that	 this	 initiative	 will	 co-exist	 with	 the	 cocoa	
industry	 without	 sacrificing the	 interest	 of	 cocoa	 farmers. To	 ensure	 long-term	
sustainability	of	cocoa	cultivation	in	the	country,	Government	through	Ghana	Cocoa	Board	
has	 initiated	 a	 programme	 to	 motivate	 the	 youth	 to	 engage	 in	 cocoa	 farming.	 	 This	 will	
reduce	 rural-urban	 migration,	 enhance	 incomes	 and	 livelihoods, and	 boost	 the	 rural	
economy.		
The	 motivation	 package	 includes	 provision	 of	 effective	 extension	 support,	 free	 cocoa	
seedlings,	free	sulphate	of	ammonia	fertilizers	to	boost	early	growth	and	establishment	of	
cocoa,	 and	 enhanced	 access	 to	 the	 mass	 spraying	 inputs	 and	 fertilisers. Since	 the	
programme	was	launched	in	2014,	over	30,000	youth	have	signed	up	in	Ashanti,	Central,	
Eastern,	and	Western	regions.	
Mr.	Speaker,
Government	has	rolled	out	programmes	that	will	increase	productivity	of	cocoa	farms	from	
an	average	yield	of	0.5	tonnes per	hectare	to	over	1.5	tonnes	per	hectare.	
26
To	renew	the	cocoa	tree	stock	and	increase	productivity,	Government	has	directed	Ghana	
Cocoa	 Board	 to	 raise	 and	 distribute	 freely	 to	 cocoa	 farmers,	 improved	 hybrid	 cocoa	
seedlings.		
During	the	2014/15	season,	50	million	cocoa	seedlings	were	raised	at	87	nursery	sites	and	
distributed	free	of	charge	to	farmers. For	the	2015/16	season,	the	nursery	sites	have	been	
increased	to	331	to	produce	60	million	seedlings	across	the	cocoa	growing	regions	for	free	
distribution	 to	 cocoa	 farmers.	 The	 increase	 in	 the	 nursery	 sites	 is	 aimed	 at	 bringing	 the	
seedlings	closer	to	the	farming	communities.	
The	 seedlings	 production	involved	 the	engagement	 of	 4,800	youth	as	 casual	labourers	in	
the	 cocoa	 growing	 communities. The	 60	 million	 seedlings,	 which	 is	 equivalent	 to	 50,000
hectares	 of	 cocoa	 farms,	 will	 increase	 the	 existing	 cocoa	 plantations	 annually.	 	 At	 the	
average	 output	 of	 1.5	 tonnes	 per	 hectare,	 an	 additional	 750,000	 metric	 tonnes	 will	 be	
added	to	Ghana’s	cocoa	output	in	the	next	10	years.
To	 motivate	 cocoa	 farmers	 to	 boost	 output	 and	 encourage	 the	 youth	 to	 take	 up	 cocoa	
farming	 as	 a	 lucrative	 business,	Government	 will	 continue	 to	 pay	 remunerative	 prices	 to	
farmers.	For	the	2014/15	cocoa	season	farmers	were	paid	GH¢5,600	per	tonne	including	a	
bonus. This	 price	was	increased	 by	 21.4	 percent	 to	GH¢6,800	 per	 tonne	 for	 the	 2015/16	
cocoa	season, including	a	bonus.
During	 the	 2013/14	 season	 Government	 made	 it	 a	 policy	 to	 distribute	 fertilisers	 free	 of	
charge	 to	 cocoa	 farmers	 and	 also	 enhance	 the	 mass	 spraying	 programme	 to	 boost	
production.	As	a	result,	for	the	2015/16	cocoa	season, 2.4	million	bags	of	granular	fertilizer	
and	1.6	million	litres	of	foliar	fertiliser	have	been	procured	for	free	distribution	to	farmers.	
For	 the	 mass	 spraying	 exercise	 1,500	 tonnes	 of	 fungicides	 and	 1.7	 million	 litres	 of	
insecticides	will	be	 supplied	 to	 farmers. Over	58,000	young	persons	in	 the	cocoa	 farming	
communities	have	been	engaged	as	sprayers	for	the	programme.
Government	 appreciates	 the	 efforts	 made	 by	 Traditional	 Authorities	 and	 landowners	 by	
generously	offering	land	to	farmers	who	intend	to	engage	in	cocoa	farming,	especially	the	
youth.	
I	 would	 like	 to	 thank	 Nana	 Baffour	 Kwame	 Anim	 II,	 the	 Chief	 of	 Krodua,	 a	 town	 in	 the	
Eastern	 Region,	 for	 generously	 offering	 500	 acres	 of	 fertile	 land	 to	 80	 young	 men	 and	
women	 in	 Krodua	 to	 cultivate	 cocoa.	 I	 wish	 to	 make	 a	 passionate	 appeal	 to	 Traditional	
Authorities	 and	 landowners	 to	 continue	 to	 offer	 land	 to	 persons	 interested	 in	 cocoa	
farming and	other	aspects	of	agriculture.
PALM
Mr.	Speaker,
Government	intends to	commence	a	new	initiative	in Palm Plantation.	Ghana	is	currently	a	
net	exporter	of	palm	oil.	And	yet	we	have	the	comparative	advantage	to	produce	vegetable	
cooking	 oils	 of	all	kinds	 for	 our	 own	 consumption.	We	must	 reverse	 this	 situation.	It	will	
27
create	 countless	number	of	jobs	and	 provide	 raw	material	 for	 countless	number	 of	uses.	
We	will	consider	the	setting	up	of	a	Palm	Development	Board	to	supervise	this	project.
SHEA	NUT
Mr.	Speaker,
The	first	shea	nut	processing	plant	with	an	initial capacity	of	100	metric	tonnes	per	day	was	
established	 and	 commissioned	 in	May	 2012	 at	 Buipe	 in	 the	 Central	Gonja	 District	 of	 the	
Northern	Region.		Arrangements	are	far	advanced	for	the	expansion	of	its	capacity	to	200	
metric	tonnes	per	day. Government	also	plans	to	establish	similar	plants	in	the	Upper	East	
and	Upper	West	Regions.	
Since	 the	 inception	 of	 the	 Shea	 Board	 in	 regulating	 shea	 nut	 purchases,	 similar	 to	 what	
pertains	in	cocoa	purchases,	the	price	per	bag	of	shea	nut	has	increased	from	GHC28.00	in	
2009	to	the	current	price	of	GHC130.00	per	bag,	an	increase	of	over	264%.	
POULTRY
Mr.	Speaker,
Under	 the	pilot	phase	of	 the	Ghana	Broiler	Re-vitalisation	Project,	which	was	launched	in	
July	2014,	a	 total	of	650,000	birds	were	 raised,	processed	and	sold by	2015.	This	created	
350	direct	jobs	and	7,800	indirect	jobs	for	poultry	farmers	and	the	youth	along	the	poultry	
value	chain.
		
In	response	to	my	call	for	an	increase	in	the	local	production	of	poultry	and	the	reduction	
of	high	import	dependency,	a	Project	Technical	Committee	was	set	up	to	work	closely	with	
EDAIF	 to	 support	 poultry	 production	 and	 processing. From	 2014	 to	 date,	 EDAIF	 has	
approved	 a	 total	 of	 GH¢14,972,802.92	 for	 fourteen	 (14)	 farming	 companies/associations	
including	 the	 Greater	 Accra	 Poultry	 Farmers	 Association,	 Dormaa	 Poultry	 Farmers	
Association	and	Bole	District	Poultry	Farmers	Association.
Under	 the	Ghana	Commercial	Agriculture	Programme (GCAP),	we	are	working	 to	support	
large-scale	 production	 of	 maize	 and	 soya	 to	 feed	 the	 poultry	 industry.	 	 When	 the	
programme	is	fully	operational,	maize	and	soya	bean	for	livestock	feed	can	be	supplied	at	a	
cheaper	rate	to	the	benefit	of	Ghanaian	poultry	farmers.		
40%	REDUCTION	IN	POULTRY	IMPORT
Mr.	Speaker,	
Government’s	 policy	 of	 40%	 poultry	 import	 reduction,	 which	 is	 currently	 underway,	 is	
creating	 thousands	 of	 jobs	 in	 the	Greater	 Accra,	 Ashanti	 and	 Brong	 Ahafo	 regions	 in	 the	
short	term.	EDAIF	is	also	enjoined	to	speed	up	disbursements	to	the	poultry	sector	in	order	
to	boost	production.
I	 have	 tasked	 the	 new	 Minister	 for	 Food	 and	 Agriculture	 to	 take	 stringent	 measures	 to	
ensure	that	the	policy	is	strictly	implemented.
28
I	am	once	again	calling	upon	the	Customs	Division	of	the	Ghana	Revenue	Authority	(GRA)	
to	 join	 hands	 with	 GHAPOHA	 and	 the	 Ministry	 of Food	 and	 Agriculture	 to	 ensure	 strict	
compliance	with	rules	and	directives	on	this	matter.
SHRIMP	FARMING
Mr.	Speaker,	
Government	 is	 supporting	 the	 establishment	 of	 a	 Shrimp	 Project	 to	 promote	 processing	
and	production	for	export.	The	project	will	start	in	June	this	year.		Production	of	fingerlings,	
laboratories,	fish	feed	factories,	production	ponds,	processing	and	marketing	facilities	will	
be	 located	 in	 parts	 of	 Greater	 Accra,	 Volta	 and	 Eastern	 Regions.	 The	 project	 will	 create	
76,000	 direct	 and	 indirect	 jobs.	 Production	 is	 projected	 at	 30,000	 metric	 tonnes	 and	
projected	export	revenue	is	between	US$60million to	US$200million.
29
EXPANDING	INFRASTRUCTURE FOR	GRWOTH	
Mr.	Speaker,
This	 Government	 is	 implementing	 the	 biggest	 infrastructure	 development	 programme	 in	
our	 country’s	 recent	 history.	 So	 much	 has	 been	 committed	 to	 delivering	 social	 and	
economic	infrastructure	in	a	relatively short	span	of	time.	
For	decades, our	people	have	had	to	cope	with	an	unacceptably	huge	gap	between	what	is	
required	and	what	exists	 in	 terms	 of	 infrastructure.	 Ageing,	 dilapidated	and	 non-existent	
infrastructure	 has	 slowed	 down	 our	 economic	 progress.	 The	 World	 Bank	 estimates	 that	
Ghana	suffers	an	infrastructural	financing	gap	of	about	US$1.5	billion	per	year.
Modern	and	expansive	infrastructure	lays	down	the	building	blocks	for	a	more	efficient	and	
robust	economy,	spurring	growth,	enhancing	the	quality	of	life	and	living	conditions	of	our	
people,	optimising	critical	human	development	indicators,	removing	protracted	sources	of	
suffering	 for	our	people	and	creating	jobs	 for	 the	multitude	of	artisans	and	professionals	
whose	livelihoods	are	guaranteed	by	working	on	such	transformational	projects.		
The	 masons,	 carpenters,	 welders,	 steel	 benders,	 painters,	 plumbers,	 tillers,	 architects,	
draughtsmen,	 quantity	 surveyors,	 civil	 engineers,	 electricians,	 glazers,	 operators,	 drivers,	
labourers	and	others	who	are	engaged	by	contractors	to	work	on	these	projects,	as	well	as,	
food	 vendors	 earn	 incomes	 through	 the	 work	 they	 do.	 These	 incomes	 represent	 money	
that	we	put	in	their	pockets	to	enhance	their	lives	and	those	of	their	dependents.	
The	 manufacturers	 and	 suppliers	 of	 building	 and	 construction	 materials, from	 whom	
purchases	 are	 made, earn	 money	 to	 sustain	 and	 expand	 their	 businesses	 and	 pay	 their	
employees. The	policy	of	an	aggressive	expansion	of our	infrastructure	as	captured	in	our	
Manifesto	 of	 2012	 cannot	 therefore	 be	 viewed	 through	 the	 narrow	 prism of	 brick	 and	
mortar	 provision. It	 must	 be	 viewed	 within	 the	 wider	 context	 of	 the	 socio-economic	
benefits	that	come	with	it.
WATER
Mr.	Speaker,
In	the	water	sector,	the	total	water	production	and	distribution	system	available	in	all	the	
52	 years	 of	 our	 nationhood	 prior	 to	 2009	 was	 only	 adequate	 to	 meet	 the	 needs	 of	
approximately	52%	of	our	people	or	approximately	14	million	out	of	our	current	population	
of	about	27	million.	This	meant	that	a	staggering	13 million	suffered	the	deprivation	of	not	
having	access	to	clean	drinking	water.	
In	 the	more	 remote	 parts	 of	 our	 country,	 the	 total	lack	 of	 potable water	meant	 that	 our	
citizens	 had	 to	 risk	 drinking	 water	 that	 likely	 carried	 water-borne	 diseases.	 Some	 of	 the	
water	 sources	 were	 shared with	 their	 cattle	 and	 other	 livestock.	 This	 situation	 had	 farreaching
ramifications	for	the	general	health	and	wellbeing	of	a	large	section	of	our	people.
Mr.	Speaker,
30
Since	my	last appearance	before	this	august	House,	a	total	of	77.5	million	gallons	of	water	
per	 day	 has	 been	added	 to	 the	 national	water	 production	 stock	 following	 the	 coming	 on	
stream	of	such	water	projects	as	the:
! Kpong	Water Expansion	Project	Phase	1,
! Kpong	Water	Intake	Rehabilitation	Project,
! Accra-Tema	Metropolitan Water	Supply	Project,
! Teshie	Nungua	Water	Desalination	Project,
! Nsawam,
! Essakyir Five	Towns,
! Mampong,
! Barekese,	and
! Other	Small	Town	Water	Projects.
The	 effect	 of	 this	 intervention	 is	 that	 out	 of	 the	 10 million	 or	 so	 Ghanaians	 who	 were	
deprived	of	water,	4	million	of	them	living	in	hundreds	of	communities	currently	have	been	
given	access	to	safe	drinking	water.
There	 are	 many	 more	 water	 projects	 dotted	 around	 the	 country,	 which are	 nearing	
completion.	These	include	the:
! Akim	Oda- Akwatia- Winneba,
! Konongo-Kumawu-Kwahu,
! Wa,
! North	Tongu,
! Adaklu	Anyigbe,	and
! Scores	of	urban and peri-urban	Small	Water	Projects.
The	completion	of	these	projects	will	increase	water	coverage	for	our	people	to	about	85%,	
which translates	into	7 million	out	of	the	10 million that	were	left	behind	as	at 2009.	These	
are	not	just	statistics.	These	are	real	people.	They	are	siblings,	friends,	and	future	leaders.	7	
million	Ghanaians	including	an	entire	generation	 that	had	never	seen	water	 flow	 through	
their	taps	at	home	since	they were	born.
And,	 if	 you	 can	 believe	 it,	 there	 was	 a	 time	 when	 to many people like	 Madam	 Naomi	
Appiah	 Korang,	 a	schoolteacher at	 the	 Kyebi	 Islamic	 Primary	 School,	 it	 didn’t	 matter	 as	
much	as	it	does	today.
Naomi,	who	is	present	in	Parliament	today,	and	many	others	are	living	testimonies	to	the	
benefits	 being	 derived	 from	 the	 1.5 million	 gallons	 per	 day	 Five-Towns	Water	 Project	 in	
Kyebi,	Osenase,	Anyinam,	Apedwa	and	Kwabeng.
I	had	the honour	of	joining	the	Okyehene Osagyefo	Amoatia	to	commission	this	particular	
project,	 so	 I	 know	 what	 I	 am	 talking	 about.	 This	 is	 a	 story	 that	 I	 am	 very	 sure the
Honourable	 Samuel	 Atta	 Akyea	 will	 corroborate	because	 water	 was	 a	daily	 challenge	for	
the	people	in	this	area.		
31
Naomi	lives	in	Kyebi	with	her	 three	children	and	she	recounts	her	difficulties	in	accessing	
clean	drinking	water	prior	to	the	inauguration	of	the	new	Water	Treatment	Plant.	
The	old	treatment	plant	was	designed	to	treat	much	less	turbid	water	in	those	days	when	a	
pin	dropped	in	the	famous	River	Birim,	could	be	viewed	from	the	riverbed.	Over	the	years,	
the	activities	of	illegal	miners - a	problem	that	is not	limited	to	Kyebi	alone	- have	changed	
the	 physical	 properties	 of	 the	 freshwater	 from	 the	 River	 Birim,	 rendering	 the	 old	 water	
treatment	 plant	 essentially	 useless	 because	 it	 was	 not	 designed	 to	 sieve	 the	 increasing	
quantities	of	mud	that	it	has	had	to	process	with	every	passing	year.
Fortunately,	 this	 situation	 has	 been	 resolved	 to	 provide	 the	 people	 of	 Kyebi,	 Osenase,	
Anyinam,	 Apedwa	 and	 Kwabeng	 potable	 water	 through	 the	 implementation	 of	 the	 FiveTowns
Water	Project,	which	has	a superior	and	efficient	mechanism	to	effectively	process	
turbid	water.	
HOUSING
Mr.	Speaker,
For	 years, the	 national	 housing	 deficit	 has	 continued	 to	 widen	 without	 commensurate
investment	 to	 bridge	 it.	 The	 lack	 of	 adequate	 public	 housing	 has	 had	 serious	 effects	 on	
many	families	and	households	who	have	to	pay	exorbitant	amounts	in	rent	just	to	secure	a	
place	to	lay	their	heads. Urgent	interventions	were	therefore	required	to	make affordable	
housing	available.
Through	 both	 direct	 investments	 and	 collaboration	 with	 the	 private	 sector,	 we	 are	
currently	 on	 course	 to	 deliver	 over	 12,500	 housing	 units,	 which	 represents	 the	 biggest	
investment in	this	sector	by	any	government	in	decades.
They	include	the	following:
! Saglemi	Housing	Project	at	Prampram	in	the	Greater	Accra	Region - 5,000	housing	
units.	The	first	1,500	units	will	be	ready	in	a	few	months.
! Nyame	Dua	Estates	at	Kpone - This	project	is	being	executed	in	collaboration	with	
Sethi	Realty	and	is	designed	to	provide	5,000	units.	The	first	phase	of	this	project	is	
almost	ready.
! Keta	Sea	Defence	Resettlement	Housing	Project - 618	out	of	836	houses	have	been	
completed	for	families	affected	by	the	Keta	Sea	Defense	Project.
! SSNIT	 Housing	 Projects - Construction	 is	 currently	 ongoing	 on	 608	 flats	 at	
Dunkonnah	near	Weija	in	 the	Ga	South	Municipality	and	240	 flats	at	Sakumono	in	
the	Tema	metropolis.
! Security	Services	Housing	Project	in	Tema - The	first	phase	comprising 168	housing	
units	 under	 this project	 has	 been	 completed.	 These	 are	 currently	 occupied	 by	
security	personnel.	The	second	phase	of	368	housing	units	is	due	for	completion	in	
a	few	months	for	occupancy	by	personnel	of	the	Navy.
! New	Labadi	Villas	Housing	Project - Under	 this	scheme,	decent	housing	units	have	
been	completed	and	are	currently	occupied	by	military	personnel	in	Accra.
! Adenta	 Regeneration	 Project	 (SHC	 Gardens) - 72	 housing	 units	 are	 nearing	
completion	 for	middle-income	households	at	Adenta.	Similar	projects	will	soon	be	
32
started	 at	 Laterbiokorshie,	 Kaneshie	 and	 Kanda	 in	 Accra,	 and	 North	 Effiakuma	 in	
Sekondi-Takoradi	metropolis.
! Tema	Development	Corporation	(TDC)	Housing	Projects - The	TDC	is	constructing	a	
total	 of	 148	 housing	 units	 in	 Communities	 1,	 22	 and	 23.	 Sixty-Eight units	 have	
already	been	completed	for	occupancy.
! Police	 Housing	 Units	 at	 Tema	 Community	 3 - Under	 a	 PPP	 arrangement,	 decent	
housing	has	been	provided	to	police	personnel.
Additionally,	Government	has	handed	over	the	4000+ affordable	housing	units	commenced	
by President	John	Agyekum	Kufour’s	Government	to	SSNIT	and	State	Housing	Corporation	
for	completion.	This	includes	the	Asokore-Mampong	Housing	Project.	
Mr.	Speaker,
I	 have	 had	 cause	 to	 caution	 state	 institutions	 that	 look	 on	 while	 their	 land	 is	 being	
encroached	 upon	 only	 to	 carry	 out	 painful	 demolitions later	 on.	 This	 is	 not	 acceptable.	
Ghanaians	 invest	 a	 lot	 of	 money	 to	 construct	 those	 houses.	 It	 doesn’t	 help	 to	 watch	
encroachment	take	place	over	a	period	of	10	years	and	then	turn	around	and	demolish	the	
properties.	
One	 such	demolition	 took	place	in	Adjei	Kojo.	Following	a	petition	 received	 from	 the	MP	
for	Tema	West,	Irene	Naa	Torshie	Addo,	I	had	a	meeting	convened	with	the	Chief	of	Staff	
and	the	Chief	Executive	of	TDC	to	address	the	issue	of	the	plight	of	the	people	affected	by	
the	demolition.
ROADS
Mr.	Speaker,
Since	 2009, we	 have	 added	 3,772	 kilometers	 to	 Ghana’s	 motorable network.	 The	 GH¢3	
billion	 Cocoa	 Roads	 Improvement	 Programme,	 which	 is	 being	 rolled	 out	 around	 the	
country,	 has	 added	 additional	 resources	 and	 impetus	 to	 the	 Roads	 Improvement	
Programme.
Permit	me	to	enumerate	the	most	significant	road	projects	on	a	region-by-region	basis.
GREATER	ACCRA
Road	works	in	the	Greater	Accra	Region	include:
! Kwame	Nkrumah	Interchange,
! Awoshie- Pokuase Road,
! Giffard	Road,
! Burma	Camp	Road,
! Spintex	Road	by-pass,	
! Boundary	Gulf	House	Road,
! Teshie-Nungua-Sakumono	Beach	Road,	and
! Ashaiman	Road.	
Additional	resurfacing	works	are	being	executed	in:
! Ningo–Prampram,
33
! Tema,
! Ashaiman,
! Nungua,
! Teshie,
! La,	and
! Accra	Central.		
There	is also	ongoing,	an	overnight asphaltic	overlay	works	on	principal	streets	in	Accra.	
Preparatory	works	for	the	redevelopment	of	the	Accra-Tema	Motorway	into	a	six-lane	road	
with	 4	 interchanges	 at	 Adjei	 Kojo,	 Abattoir,	 Teshie	 Link,	 and	 Tema	 Roundabout will	
commence	soon.
EASTERN	REGION
In	the	Eastern	Region,	roads	completed	or	being	worked	on	include:
! Suhum town	roads,
! Asamankese	town	roads,
! Somanya	town	roads,
! Kyebi	town	roads,
! Kwafokrom-Apedwa	Road,
! Nsawam-Aburi,
! Nkawkaw	by-pass,
! Nkawkaw-Atibie,
! Adeiso-Asamankese,
! Nsawam-Asamankese,	
! Osenase-Akwatia-Kade,
! Apedwa-Kyebi-Bunso,
! Koforidua-Bunso,
! Suhum-Asamankese,
! Anyinabrem-Amagyei,
! Railway	Station-Subreso,
! Abuabo-Kofi	Agyei,
! Akoase-Subriso-Ntronang,
! Larbikrom-Badukrom,
! Tweapease-Behenese	Junction,
! Antaso-K.	Anumah,
! Noyem-Winso-Amuana-Praso,
! Akim	Sekyere-Abekoase,
! Mangoase-Kukua,	and
! Chia-Brenase-Ofoase.
The	Adomi	Bridge	rehabilitation	project	has	been	completed	and	has	been	opened	for	use	
by	motorists	and	the	general	public.	
VOLTA	REGION
34
In	 the	 Volta	 Region,	 the	 Eastern	 Corridor	 Project	 is	 progressing	 steadily.	 The	 Asikuma	
Junction to	 Have,	 Dodi-Pepesu	 to	 Nkwanta,	 Nkwanta-Oti	 Damanko	 sections	 are	 under	
construction.	
Other	road	projects	in	the	Region	include	the	following:	
! Kete Krachi	to	Buya,
! Ho	– Fume,
! Kpando	town	roads,
! Worawora	– Dambai,
! Bame	– Dzolokpuita	– Kpedze,
! Ho	– Adidome,
! Metrikasa	– Havedzi,
! Gwolokwati	– Wli	– Hohoe,
! Kpando	- Alavanyo,
! Kpeme	– Nkonya	- Gbi	Wegbe,
! Aveti	– Logaba,
! Alakpeti	– Anfoega	– Akukome	– Aveti,
! Dalive	– Agortage,
! Dove	(Atitekpo	Junction)	– Mepe,
! Dove	Junction	– Dove	– Aveyime,
! Dodi	Papaase	– Mensahkrom	– Asuboi,
! Dapaa	Jn-Pampawie	– Ahamansu,
! Tadzevu	– Devego	- Agorve	Junction,
! Shia	Honuta	Kpedze	&	Kpedze	town	roads,
! Have	– Kpando,
! Hohoe	– Jasikan,	and
! Have	– Hohoe.
Rehabilitation	 of	 selected	 roads	 in	 the	 Ho	 Municipality,	 including	 the	 access	 into	 the	
University	of	Health	and	Allied	Sciences,	are	ongoing.	
The	 Juapong-Fodzoku-Akuse	 Dam	 road	 and	 the	 Sogakofe-Battor	 road	 have	 been	
completed,	while	the	Juapong- Abutia-Sokode	road	is	ongoing.
WESTERN	REGION
In	the	Western	Region,	work	is	being	done	on	the	following	roads:
! Kansaworodo	By-Pass,
! 20	km	asphalt	overlay	of	selected	roads	in	Sekondi-Takoradi,
! Asphalt	overlay	of	Tarkwa,	Axim	and	Elubo	town	roads,
! Daboase	and	Sefwi	Wiawso	town	roads,
! Prestea,	Asankragua	and	Enchi	town	roads,
! 110	km	Agona	Junction-Elubo,
! 94km	Tarkwa-Bogoso	Ayamfuri, and
! 52	km	Ayamfuri-Asawinso	roads.
Other	roads	under	construction	are	the	following:
35
! Sefwi-Bekwai-Eshiem,
! Sewfi-Wiawso-Akontombra,
! Benchema-Oseikojokrom,
! Juabeso-Bodi-Akontombra,
! Daboase-Atieku,	
! Anyinabrim-Sui-Bodi	Junction,
! Prestea-Samreboi,
! Enchi-Dadieso,
! Adwofua-Oseikojokrom,
! Buako-Sankore,
! Suhyenso-Subriso-Djoboakrom,
! Kwasuo-Gyankufa,	and
! Johnkrom-Attahkrom.
Work	 has	 also	 commenced	 on	 the	 51.2	 kilometre Edwenase-Atobiase,	 Juaboso-Dadieso,	
and	Anto	Dompen-Daboase	rural	roads.	The	construction	of	the	10-kilometre Oil	and	Gas	
Enclave	roads	along	the	pipe-line	including	the	Amazure	Bridge	is	on-going.
CENTRAL	REGION
Mr.	Speaker
In	 the	 Central	 Region,	 work	 is	 progressing	 impressively	 on	 the	 Kasoa	 Interchange.	
Completion	 of	 work	 on	 this	 interchange	 will	 bring	 great	 relief	 to	 travelers	 on	 this	road,	
which has	been	the	source	of	severe	frustration	and	irritation for	the	travelling	public	as	a	
result	of	vehicular	traffic.
Also	in	the	Central	Region,	the	following	are	underway:
! Upgrading	 works	 on	 roads	 in Cape	 Coast,	 Dunkwa-on	 Offin,	 Winneba	 and	 Agona	
Swedru	townships.	
! Asphalt	overlay	in	Cape	Coast,	Dunkwa,	Saltpond	and	Mankessim.
! Construction	 of	 the	 Kasoa	 by-pass,	 Mankessim-Abora	 Dunkwa,	 Dunkwa-Twifo	
Praso- Assin	 Foso,	 Amanful-Nyarkrom-Nkum	 and	 Assin	 Nyakomase-Senchiem	
Roads.	
! Construction	 of	 Assin-Twifo	 Praso	,	Essiam	Town	 roads	and	 the	 Breman	 AsikumaAmanfopon
Road.	
Work	is	also	progressing	steadily	on	the:
! Ekwamoase-Ofabil,
! Sankor-Kweikrom-Ojobi-Akoti,
! Abowin-Nkodwo-Asempanyim,
! Duakwa-Akwakwaa	(Phase	1),	and
! Dominase-Subinso	roads.
Work	has	also	been	completed	on	the	following	feeder	roads	in	the	Central Region:
! Bawjiase	– Aponkyekura,
! Bawjiase	– Ayensuako,
! Adawukwa	- Adjator	– Honi,
36
! Bewuanum	– Adawukwa,
! Bawjiase	- Amonkrom	(Congo)	– Tetteykura,
! Ahentia	- Busumabra	Junction	– Kweikrom,
! Papaase	No.	1	– Odotom,
! Kwa	Bondze	- Larbie	– Jeikrodua,	and
! Bontrase – Dasum.		
ASHANTI	REGION
Mr.	Speaker,
In	the	Ashanti	Region
! The Sofoline Interchange	is	almost	complete.
! Works	are	ongoing	on	the	Bekwai	and	New	Edubiase	town	roads.
! The	Assin	Praso- Bekwai	road	is	currently	in	use	following	its	completion	last	year.
! Major	 road	 projects	 such	 as	 the	 Bomfa	 Junction-Asiwa-Bekwai,	 Bekwai-AmpahaAsiwa,
 Kumawu-Timaate-Drobonso	 and	 Agyenkwaso-Anomabu-Gyadem	 roads	 are	
progressing	steadily.
! The	 New	 Edubiase- Anomabo,	 Amantia- Obuasewa,	 Obuasi	 Junction- DunkwaAyamfuri,
 Ahwiankwanta- Adumasa	 and	 Trabuom- Toase	 Road	 sections	 are	 also	
being	worked	on	and	are	on	schedule.	
BRONG	AHAFO
Mr.	Speaker,
In	the	Brong	Ahafo	Region the	following	roads	are	under	construction:	
! Nsawkaw	- Namase	section	of	the	Wenchi	- Sampa	road,
! Berekum	- Sampa,
! Atebubu	- Kwame	Danso	- Kwadwokrom,
! Gaoso	- Kukuom	Junction,
! Prang	-		Kintampo,
! Dormaa	Ahenkro	- Nkrankwanta,	and
! Tuobodom - Offuman - Wenchi.
Work	is	also	ongoing	on	the:
! Gambia	No.	2 - Kyeremasu,
! Tepa	Junction - Goaso,
! Kofibadukrom	Junction - Kofibadukrom,
! Dormaa	Ahenkro - Nkrankwanta,
! Dormaa - Nkrankwanta,
! Atebubu	Kwame	Danso - Kojokrom,
! Bechem - Techimentia - Akomadan,
! Nkroanza - Jema,
! Yamfo - Asuadei - Ansin,
! Asumura – Tipokrom,	and
! Akrodie – Kanchiamoa.
The	following	are	also	on	course:	
! Dadiesoaba - Twabidi,
37
! Dormaa	- Ahenkro	- Baabianiha,
! Asuadei	Junction	- Asuadei,
! Antwirifo	- Danyame	Feeder	Roads,
! Sunyani town	roads,
! Techiman	town	roads,
! Nkoranza	Goaso town	roads,
! Dorma	Ahenkro	town	roads,	and
! Kade	town	roads.
NORTHERN	REGION
Mr.	Speaker,
In	 the	 Northern	 Region,	 I	 inaugurated	 the	 147-kilometre	 Fufulso-Sawla	 Road	 last	 year	
following	 its	 successful	 completion.	 Significant	 progress	 has	 been	 made	 on	 the	 BuipeTamale
road	and	work	has	started	on	the	Busunu-Daboya	road.	
The	following	roads	are	at	various	stages	of	completion:	
! Daboya-Mankarigu - Wiase	including	the	Oti	Damanko-Bimbila-Yendi	road,
! Yendi - Nakpanduri	on	the	Eastern	Corridor,
! Nyankpala - Tolon,
! Tamale – Salaga - Makango	(Awarded),
! Chereponi - Yendi,
! Busunu - Daboya,
! Yendi - Tamale,
! Tamale - Kumbungu,	and
! Tamale - Karaga - Gushegu	(Awarded).
Over	the	last	two	years,	30km	of	roads	have	been	rehabilitated	in	the	Tamale	Municipality	
with	work	on	another	25km	underway.	
Roads	 in	 Yendi,	 Savelugu,	Damongo	 and	 Bole	 have	 also	 been	 worked	 on. We	 are	 also	 in	
negotiation	 for	 funding	 for	 the	 construction	 of	 a	 bridge	 over	 the	 White Volta	 between	
Daboya	and	Tolon.	
UPPER	EAST
Mr.	Speaker,
In	the	Upper	East	Region, the	following	have	either	been	completed	or	are	on	going:
! 10	km	of	roads	in	the	Bolgatanga	municipality,
! Navrongo	and	Bawku	town,
! Navrongo - Tumu,
! Bolgatanga - Bongo,
! Wikongo - Tongo,		
! Navrongo - Tono,
! Bolgatanga- Bawku, Queiroz Galvao	who	are	working	on	 the	Tamale	Airport,	have	
substantially	 finished	 their	 work.	 We	 have	 asked	 them	 to	 demobilize	 their	
equipment	on	to	the	Bolgatanga- Bawku	road.	
! Misiga - Kulungugu, and	
38
! Sandema - Wiesi.
UPPER	WEST	REGION
Mr.	Speaker,
Seven	 kilometres	 of	 town	 roads	 have	 been	 completed	 in	 the	 Wa	 Municipality.	 The	 Wa	
campus	of	the	University	for	Development	Studies	has	also	seen	improvements	in	the	road	
network.
Other	road	works	in	the	region	include:
! Tumu	roads,
! Nadowli	- Lawra	– Hamile,
! Wa	- Bulenga,	and
! Wa-Dorimon.
Construction	of	steel	bridges	on	the	
! Yala	- Sombisi,
! Tantale	- Tuvuu,
! Tuvuu - Lzabisi,
! Wa - Walewale,
! Jeffisi	- Gwolu,	and
! Guono-Kperisi.
Mr.	Speaker,
Many	of	 these	 roads	have	been	in	a	bad	state	 for	many	years.	There	are	a	good	number	
more	 crying	 for	 attention.	 It	 is	 not	 practically possible	 for	 us	 to	 commence	 work	 on	 all	
roads	 in	 Ghana	 at	 once.	 I	 urge	 Ghanaians	 to	 exercise	 patience.	 As	 we	 finish	 with	 these	
roads, we	will	commence	work	on	other	equally	important	roads.
As	 a	 result	 of	 directives	 to	 the	 Roads	 and	 Highways	 Ministry	 to	 ensure	 that	 projects	
financed	by	Government	of	Ghana	budget	are	awarded	to	local	contractors,	I	am	proud	to	
announce	that	roughly 95%	of	contractors	working	on	GOG	awarded	roads	and	the	Cocoa	
Roads	Improvement	Programme	are	Ghanaians - like	Emmanuel	Aboagye,	who	represents	
a	 new	 crop	 of	 young	 and dynamic	 road	 contractors. His	 firm	 MMNAB	 Company	 Limited	
employs	73	people	and	is	working	on	the	Bekwai	Town	Roads	under	the	COCOBOD	Roads	
Programme.
Mr.	Speaker,
He	 started	 his	 construction	 company	 in	 2009	 and	 he	 is	 only	 32	 years	 old.	 He	 graduated	
from	the	Kwame	Nkrumah	University	of	Science	and	Technology with	a	Bachelor	of	Science	
in	Agriculture Engineering and	another	BSc	in	Petroleum	Engineering.	
The	 interesting	 thing	 is	 that he	 is	 a	 youth	member	 of	 the	NPP	 and	 was	 a	 Polling	 Station	
Chairman.	 This	 is	 a	 Government	 that	 opens	 up	 the	 opportunities	 of	 this	 country	 to	
everybody	without	political	prejudice.	I	cut	the	sod	 for	the	Ashanti	segment	of	the	Cocoa	
Town	Roads	in	new	Edubiase	and	in	Bekwai.	The	site	where	we	cut	the	sod	for	the	cocoa	
39
roads	project	in Ashanti	at	Bekwai	was	on	the	site	of	Emmanuel	Aboagye.	And	I	must	say,	
as young	as	he	is,	he	does	a	very	fantastic	job.	
Mr.	Speaker,
Ghanaian	contractors	can	do	as	well	as	 foreign	contractors	and	I	want	 to ensure	 that	we	
raise	indigenous	Ghanaian	 construction	 firms	 that	will	 not	 only	 construct roads	in	Ghana	
but, in	future, will	construct	roads	in	other	countries.	
Through	 this	massive	 road	 construction	effort,	we	are	 creating	 thousands	 of	jobs	 for	 our	
youth	 who	 have	 been	 engaged	 by	 the	 local	 contractors	 working	 on	 these	 roads.	 It	 also	
means	the	profit	earned	from	these	public	works	is	retained	and	invested	in	this	country.
As	 of	 2012,	 there	 were	 only	 6	 asphalt	 plants	 in	 Ghana	 mostly	 owned	 by	 Foreign	
Construction	Companies.	Today, there	are	22	of	such	plants,	majority	of	which	are	owned	
by Ghanaians.
In	order	 to	address	 the	perennial	problem	of	debts	owed	 to	contractors,	a	portion	of	 the	
Energy	Sector	Levy	will	be	used	 to	defray	about	GH¢323	million	owed	 them	by	 the	Road	
Fund.	 This	 will	 also	 enable	 the Road	 Fund	 amortise	 another	 GH¢300	 million, borrowed	
from	SSNIT	in	2008	and	2010, to	support	its	activities.	Additionally, it	will	enable	the	Road	
Fund	to	scale	up	road	maintenance	and	repair	to	ensure	longer	life	spans for	our	roads.
Mr.	Speaker,
The	massive	investment	we	are	making	in	 road	 construction	is	making	life	easier	 for	 our	
people.	It	is	 facilitating	movement	 of	 people	as	well	as	goods	and	 services.	It	is	 boosting	
economic	 activity	 and	 giving	 motorists	 greater	 options	 while	 cutting	 down	 travel	 time	
significantly.
Today, it	is not	unusual	to	go	to	bed	having driven	on	a	bad	road	only	to	wake	up	to	find	
that	the	road	has	been	re-asphalted	and	covered	with	beautiful	road	markings.	Many	have	
also	left	for	work	in	the	morning	driving	on	poor	roads	only	to	return	in	the	evening	to	find	
their	roads	re-done.	
The	savings	for	motorists	in	terms	of	money	that	would	have	been	used	to	fix	broken-down	
vehicles	 due	 to	 bad	 roads	cannot	 be	 underestimated.	The	 savings	 for	commercial	 drivers	
who	 can	 now	 ply	 certain	 roads	multiple	 times	 because	 they	 can	move	 quicker	and	more	
easily	on	the	smooth	roads can	also	not	be	underestimated.	
Ask	Mohammed	Hissan,	who	 has	 been	 driving	 since	 2004	and	 plies	 the	route to	Tamale.
Before	 the	 completion	 of	 the	Sawla-Fufulso	 Road,	Mohammed	 says	 he	and	 other	 drivers	
spent	between	8	and	9	hours	traveling	from	Wa	to	Tamale. With	the	road	completed	now,	
an	excited	Mohammed	says	 they	now	spend	a	maximum	of	4-and-a-half	hours	doing	 the	
same	journey	and	that	now, travelling	across	the	two	regional	capitals	is	much	safer.
Ghana	has	the	most	extensive	engineered	roads	in	West	Africa.	I	intend	by	the	time	I	leave	
office	in	2021	for	Ghana	to	be	among	countries	with	the	best	road	network	in	Africa.
40
Let	me	appeal	 to	drivers	 to	 strictly	observe	road	 safety	 regulations	 to	 save	lives	and	halt	
the	carnage	on	our	 roads.	It	was	heart	wrenching	 to	 see	 the	 severe	injuries	 sustained	by	
the	survivors	of	the	bus	accident,	many	of	them	children. I	wish	to	salute	the	doctors	and	
staff	especially	of	the	Kintampo	hospital	and	the	other	health	facilities	who	helped	to	save	
the	lives	of	the	survivors.		
Mr.	Speaker,
Pedestrian	and	passenger-related	fatalities	account	for	nearly	63%	of	all	road	traffic	related	
deaths. The	 National	 Road	 Safety	 Commission	 (NRSC)	 is strengthening	 the	 ‘Speak	 Up’	
passenger	campaign	launched	in	2015	and	putting	in	place	a	new	campaign	on	pedestrian	
safety.	 	 It	 is	 implementing	 a	 plan	 to	 construct	 and	 install	 968-lollipop crossing	 stands	 at	
strategic	locations	to	aid	the	use	of	the	roads	by	children	and	vulnerable	adults.	
We	will	continue	 to	support	 the	Police	MTTD	with	logistics	such	as	speed	 radar	guns	and	
alcometers.	
Mr.	Speaker,
As	 part	 of	 its	 mandate	 of	 promoting	 good	 driving	 standards	 and	the	 use	 of	 roadworthy	
vehicles	 on	 our	 roads,	 the	 Driver	 Vehicles	 License	 Authority	 (DVLA)	 automated	 15	 of	 its	
offices	 to	improve	 the	delivery	of	service	 to	 the	public.	The	Authority	is	in	 the	process	of	
digitizing vehicle	 records	 to	 pave	 way	 for	 other	 stakeholders,	 such	 as	 the	 MTTD	 and	
insurance	companies,	to	have	real	time	access	to	vehicle	records.		
TRANSPORT
Mr.	Speaker,
We	have	chalked	major	successes	in	our	drive	 to	aggressively	modernise	and	expand	our	
transportation	 system.	 Today	 Ghanaians	 and	 foreigners	 alike	 travelling	 through	 Kotoka	
International	Airport’s	Terminal	II	transit	 through	a	 refurbished	arrival	 hall	 that	meets	all	
international	standards.	The	new	arrival	hall	gives	 travelers	a	most	 favourable	impression	
of our	country.
Work	is	currently	ongoing	on	an	ultra-modern	International	Terminal	building	to	be	known	
as	Terminal	3.	It	is	designed	to	accommodate	5 million	passengers	a	year	and	process	1,250	
passengers	 an	 hour.	 It	 will	 have	 six	 boarding	 bridges,	 a	 large	 retail	 area	 and	 three	 main	
business	lounges,	among	others.	
The	Turkish	construction	company	has	taken	possession	of	the	site	and	has	already	started	
working	feverishly.	I	will	have	the	honour	to	be	joined	on	the	1st of	March 2016	by	Turkish	
President	Recep	Tayyip	Erdogan to	break	ground	for	official	commencement	of	work	on	
this	monumental	project.	This	project	will	surely	make	Ghana	the	preferred	hub	for	transit	
passengers	in	West	Africa.
I	 am	 pleased	 to	 note	 that	 this	 project	 is	 being	 financed	 by	 credit	 raised	 by	 the	 Ghana	
Airport	Company	Limited	on	its	own	balance	sheet	with	no	sovereign	guarantee	or	charge	
41
to	the	public	debt	stock. This	is	in	line	with	our	new	public	debt	management	strategy	that	
compels	public	companies	to	borrow	using	their	own	financial	muscle.	
To	further	enhance	the	operations	of	the	airport	and	cater	for	the	needs	of	importers	and	
exporters,	construction	of	a	new	state-of-the-art	Import,	Export	and	Transit	Cargo	Centre,	
Office	Complex	&	Aircraft	Ramp	Handling	Operation	is	almost	complete.	
The	 Centre	 will	 be	 equipped	 with	 the	 latest	 cargo	 handling	 equipment, including	
automated	 storage	 and	 retrieval	 systems	 accommodating	 2,800	 pallet	 positions,	 minishipment
tower,	cold	stores,	bullion	stores,	x-ray	scanners	and	the	highest	level	of	security	
controls	 and	 CCTV	 monitoring	 for	 safety	 and	 security	 of	 goods	 and	 counter-narcotics	
purposes.
Mr.	Speaker,
Work	 is	 progressing	 steadily	 on	 converting	 the	 Kumasi	 and	 Tamale	 Airports	 into	
international	 airports. Last	 year,	 work	 was	 completed on	 the	 first	 phase	 of	 the	 Kumasi	
International	 Airport.	 Work	 on	 the	 Tamale	 International	 Airport	 will	 also	 be	 completed
soon.	These	will	inject	greater	 flexibility	into	air	 travel	and	 become	growth	 poles	around	
which	the	economy	of	the	middle	and	northern parts	of	our	country	will	revolve.	
Work	 will	 also	 be	 completed	 on	 the	 Aerodrome	 at	Ho	 to	 give	Ghanaians	more	 air	 travel	
options.	The	procurement	process	 for	the	temporary	terminal	to	allow	commercial	 flights
to	commence	operations	into	Wa is	underway.
Mr.	Speaker,
In	 the	 Maritime	 sector,	 the	 expansion	 works	 on	 both	 Tema	 and	 Takoradi	 Harbours	 are	
moving	steadily.	The	Phase	I	expansion	works	in	Takoradi	are	expected	to	be	completed	in	
May	this	year.	The	expansion	of	these	two	ports	will	create	approximately	10,000	new	jobs	
for	our	people.
The	following	projects	are	also	ongoing	at	the	Tema	Port:
! Bulk	 Cargo	 Handling	 Jetty	 project	 which	 will	 provide	 a	 jetty	 for the	 off-loading	 of	
bulk	cargo- clinker,	cement	and	related	products	to	free	the	other	berths	for other	
commercial	cargo	vessel	to	reduce	waiting	time	of	vessels.		
! The	 development	 of	 four	 (4)	 container	 terminals	 at	 the	 port	 including	 an	 access	
road	from	the	port	to	the	motor	way	and	expansion	of	the	motor	way	from	four	(4)	
to	six	(6)	lanes.	
! The	 reconstruction	 of	 the	 Net-Mending	 Wharf	 at	 the	 Tema	 Fishing	 Harbour	 to	
support	 the	 artisanal	 fishing	 industry	 and	 to	 enhance	 environmentally	 safe	 fish	
handling.		
An	even	bigger	expansion	project	aimed	at	increasing	the	size	of	the	Tema	Harbour	to	four	
times	 its	 current	 size,	 to	 respond	 to	 increasing	 container	 volumes	 will	 begin	 shortly.	The	
US$1.5	billion	project	will	be	the	largest	private	sector	investment	in	the	transport	sector	in	
recent	 years	 and	 will	 result	 in	 the	 provision	 of	 a	 modern	 harbour	 with	 state	 of	 the	 art	
42
equipment	 that	is	able	 to	 take	 on	increasing	 trade,	vital	 for	economic	 development.	This	
project	is	being	undertaken	by Meridian	Port	Services	(MPS).
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 Ghana	 Urban	 Transport	 Project,	 which	 is	 being	 implemented	 by	 the	 Ministry	 of	
Transport	in	collaboration	with	the	Ministry	of	Local	Government	and	Rural	Development,	
is	expected	to	provide	scheduled	passenger	services	along	some	designated	routes	within	
the	Accra	metropolis. Private	sector	transport	operators	will	own	and	manage	the	buses	for	
these	 routes. Government	 is	 assisting	 them	 to	 procure	 buses	 for	 the	 Bus	 Rapid	 Transit	
System	to	improve	on	its	service	delivery.	
Dedicated	 bus	 lanes	are	 being	 constructed.	The	 first	 one	 from	 Amasaman	 to	 the	 Central	
Business	 District	 has	 been completed. This	 is	 a	 lane	 that	 will	 be	 used	 only	 by	 buses	 to	
ensure	the	provision	of	regular	and	efficient	mass	transit	services	for	passengers	and	also	
to	reduce	congestion.																	
ICT	AND	TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Mr.	Speaker,
From	 the	mid	1990’s	when	we	began	 the	ICT	 revolution,	Ghana	has	attained	an	enviable	
mobile	 and	 fixed	 telephony	 subscription	 record	 of	 33,099,514	 as	 at	 August	 2015	 as	
compared	 to	 11million	 in	 2008.	Mobile	 and	 fixed	 Internet	 subscribers	 have also	 reached	
17,159,383.		
Last	year,	we	established	 the	National	Emergency	Response	Number - 112 - which allows	
callers	 in	 distress	 to	 access	 any	 of	 the	 emergency	 services.	 It	 proved	 extremely	 useful	
during	 the	 period	 of	 the	 June	 3rd Fire and	 Flood	 Disaster.	We	 have	 also	 established	 the	
Government	Online	Portal - the	eServices	portal	to	provide	Government	services	online.	
This	means	we	are	almost	at	the	point of	conducting	paperless Cabinet	sessions.		Indeed,	at	
our	 last	 Cabinet	 sitting,	 I	 indicated	 that	 I	 would	 soon	 give	 a	 deadline	 when	 hard	 copy	
Cabinet	files	would no	longer	be	tolerated.	Very	soon,	distinguished	members	of	the	House	
will	also	be	conducting	paperless	Parliamentary	sessions.	
Mr.	Speaker,
With	 expansion	 in	 mobile	 and	 fixed	 broadband	 including	 4G	 LTE,	 the	 recently	 auctioned	
800MHZ	spectrum,	the	establishment	of	the	National	Data	Centre	among	others,	Ghana’s	
digital	 economy	 has	 been	 strategically	 positioned	 to	 blossom.	 We	 are	 witnessing	 more	
software	being	developed	locally	by	the	youth.	
Cash	is	finding	its	way	gradually	into	the	electronic	realm	through	mobile	money	and	other	
initiatives.	More	and	more	digital	jobs	are	being	created	with	every	click	of	the	button.	This	
is	why	we	continue	to	train	more	girls	in	ICT	to	ensure	digital	inclusion.	Last	year,	 for	the	
pilot	programme	we	trained	about	900	girls	in the	Volta	Region	in ICT.	This	year	1,000	more	
will	be	trained in	other	parts	of	the	nation.
Mr. Speaker,
43
A growing telecommunications industry requires a dynamic regulatory framework,
which ensures customer satisfaction, good return on investment and adequate
participation of	theprivate sector.		
To this end, in August 2014, Cabinet approved four policies	to	establish:
! The Mobile Virtual Network Operating License
! The Interconnect Clearing House License
! The International Wholesale Carrier License and
! The Unified Telecom License
44
TRANSPARENT	AND	ACCOUNTABLE	GOVERNANCE
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 canker	 of	 corruption	 and	 its	 negative	 impact	 on	 development	 is	 well	 known.	 It	
continues	to	pose	a	big	threat	to	every	society,	in	both	developed	and	developing	nations.	
While	 the	 canker	 spares	 no	 country,	 its	 effects	 are	 felt	 more	 in	 developing	 and	 poor	
countries	as	it	exacerbates	poverty	and	hinder	development.	It	eats	into	the	moral	fabric	of	
society	and	undermines	the	foundations	of	democracy	and	good	governance.	
Corruption	is	a	disease,	which	left	unchecked	can	choke	and	kill	a	nation.	It	is	an	enemy	of	
progress	and	development	and	a	threat	to	peace	and	security.	It	is	therefore	an	obligation	
on	all	of	us	to	mobilise	our	efforts	in	the	fight	to	eradicate	corruption.	
Mr.	Speaker,
We	 have	 tackled	 corruption	 with	 determination	 and	 fortitude	 in	 an	 effort	 to	 stamp	 out	
systemic	indiscipline	in	the	fabric of	public	and	social	service.	We	have	refused	to	bury	our	
heads	in	the	sand	like	the	ostrich	or	to	adopt	a	defensive	posture.	The	indifference	of	the	
past	 has	 given	 way	 to	 a	 refreshing	 blast	 of	 sunlight,	 a	 proven	 potent	 and	 enduring	
disinfectant	for	the	canker.	This	firm	position	and	commitment	has	heightened	public	hope	
and	confidence	that	the	fight	against	corruption	is	winnable.
Mr.	Speaker,
We	 decided	 in	 2009	 that	 a	 ten-year	 action	 plan	 that	 addresses	 corruption	 in	 a	 more	
strategic,	scientific and	sustainable	manner	is	the	right	way	to	go	and that	the	plan	should	
be	integrated	into	national	development	planning.	
The	nation	was	unanimous	in	support	of	the	National	Anti-Corruption	Action	Plan	(NACAP).	
That	 is	 partly	 why	 the	 nation	 was	 united,	 through	 our	 representatives	 in	 Parliament,	 in	
adopting	 the	 NACAP.	 Following	 its	 adoption,	 I	 have	 inaugurated	 the	 High	 Level	
Implementation	 Committee,	 as	 one	 of	 the	 structures	 to	 facilitate	 implementation	 of	 the	
plan.	
The	 Committee	 is	 responsible	 for	 providing	 strategic	 policy	 direction	 and	 advice	 to	
implementing	 bodies,	 and	 assisting	 CHRAJ	 and	 the	 National	 Development	 Planning	
Commission	(NDPC)	in	monitoring	and	coordinating	the	implementation	of	NACAP.	
The	 Committee	 consists	 of	 representatives	 from	key	 state	institutions,	 the	 private	Sector	
and	Civil	Society	Organisations.	
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 ‘progress	 report’	 presented	 by	 the	 Acting Commissioner	 of	 CHRAJ	 reveals	 that	
significant	 progress	 has	 been	 made	 in	 the	 first	 year	 of	 the	 implementation	 of	 NACAP	
45
despite	some	challenges.	Government	is	determined	to	play	its	role	under	NACAP	and	will	
sanction	 heads	 of	 institutions	 that	 do	 not	 comply	 with	 the	 directives	 on	 the	
implementation	of	NACAP.	
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 country	 is	 doing	 its	 best	 to	 combat	 money	 laundering	 and	 Terrorist	 financing	 after	
establishing	 the	required	legislative	 framework.	Three	 (3)	 successful	convictions	involving	
money	laundering	have	been	secured	following	continuous	analysis	of	intelligence	of	over	
200	Suspicious	Transaction	Reports	(STRs).	
In	the	case	involving	ghost	names	on	the	payroll	of	the	National	Service	Scheme	(NSS),	the	
Attorney	General	has	commenced	the	prosecution	of	a	number	of	persons.	Thirty-five	(35)	
officials	including	a	 former	Executive	Director	and	his	Deputy	have	been	arraigned	before	
court	and	four	have	already	been	convicted.	130	others	are	being	processed	for	court.	163	
officers,	some	of	whose	careers	in	the	Scheme	span	several	Governments,	and	were	neck	
deep	in	the	fraudulent	enterprise	have	been	dismissed.	
Following	 the	 passage	 of	 the	 Youth	 Employment	 Agency	 Act,	 Act	 887	 of	 2015,	 we	 have	
taken	 measures	 to	 install	 strong	 systems	 to	 ensure	 probity,	 transparency	 and	
accountability. Steps	are	being	 taken	to	ensure	 that	 transactions	 take	place	on	electronic	
payment	platforms. I	have	no	doubt	that	these	measures	will	strengthen	the	systems	and	
procedures	 in	 the	 Agency	 to	 avoid	 a	 recurrence	 of	 the	 challenges	 its	 predecessor	
encountered.	In	the	meantime,	over	fifty	million	Ghana	Cedis	has	been	recovered	from	the	
Agency’s	debtors.
Mr.	Speaker,
I	share	the	sentiments	and,	sometimes,	the	impatience	of	the	public	concerning	the	pace	at	
which	 some	 of	 the	 investigations	 are	 proceeding,	 but	 our	 commitment	 to	 constitutional	
governance	and	the	rights	of	persons,	enjoin	us	to	be	patient	with	the	judicial	processes.	
As	 I	 said	 last	 month,	 “we	 cannot	 be	 adherents	 of	 constitutional	 democracy,	 and	 be	
admirers	of	arbitrary	justice”. I	wish	to	emphasise	the	commitment	of	my	administration	to	
expose	and	take	action	on	allegations	of	corruption	that	are	brought	to	our	attention.
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 new	 Board	 and	 Management	 of	 the	 Savanna	 Accelerated	 Development	 Authority	
(SADA)	 have	 comprehensively	 addressed	 the	 concerns	 raised	 in	 the	 2013	 audit	 report	
regarding	 the	 use	 of	 resources.	 The	 financial	 accounts	 of	 SADA	 from	 2012	 to	 date	 have	
been	audited,	and	the	2014	accounts	will	be	published	as	part	of	SADA’s	annual	report.	
A	 comprehensive	 report	 on	 the	 audit,	 including	 recommendations	 to	 address	 financial	
malpractices,	 is	 ready	 and	 will	 be	 published	 in	 due	 course.	 In	 addition,	 an	 external	
independent	 body	 has	 conducted	a	 comprehensive	institutional	assessment	 of	SADA	and	
steps	outlined	to	strengthen	the	institution’s	performance	and	accountability.	
46
Last	 year, following	 concerns	 about	 the	 re-spraying	 and	 branding	 of	 116	 Metro	 Mass	
Transit	 buses,	 the	 Chief	 of	 Staff	 promptly	 asked	 the	 Attorney	 General	 to	 look	 into	 the	
matter.	The	Attorney-General	concluded	that	if	proper	procedures	had	been	followed	the	
State	would	have	saved	about	GH¢1.5	million.	
The	 Chief	 of	 Staff	 subsequently	 directed	 the	 A-G to	 pursue	 the	 recovery	 of	 the	 excess	
amount.	 The	 contractor,	 following	meetings	 with	 the	 A-G	 and	 without	 prejudice	 to	 their	
legal	rights,	agreed	to	refund	the	amount	in	three	installments	by	the	end	of	next	month.	
The	first	installment	of	GH¢300,000	has	been	paid	to	the	A-G’s	Department.
Mr.	Speaker,
As	 you	 would	 recall,	 ace	 investigative	 journalist,	 Anas	 Aremeyaw	 Anas,	 conducted	 some	
underground	investigations	and	presented	my	office	with	a	petition	accusing	some	judges	
and	 other	 judicial	 officers	 of	 corruption.	 As	 required	 by	 the	 constitution,	 I	 referred	 the	
petition	 to	 the	 Chief	 Justice	 for	 investigation.	 On	 the	 recommendation	 of	 the	 inquiring	
panel,	I	approved	the	dismissal	of	23	judges	from	the	bench.
Mr.	Speaker,	
In	this	fight	against	corruption,	there	is	a	need	for	us	to	combine	law	enforcement	with	an	
approach	that	also	emphasises	national	integrity	as	an	important	component	of	NACAP.	In	
connection	with	this,	I	take	note	of	the	role	assigned	to	the	Office	of	President	to	institute	
a	National	Integrity	Awards	Programme	to	motivate	honest	people	in	the	country.	
I	 am	 determined	 to	 have	 the	 awards	 programme	 established	 within	 the	 time frame	
prescribed	by	the	NACAP.	The	criteria	to	be	developed	for	this	important	programme	will	
be	transparent	and	participatory.	I	urge	you	all	to	take	interest	in	it	and	at	the	appropriate	
time,	submit	proposals	to	assist	us	institute	the	scheme.
Mr.	Speaker,
We	 are	 working	 tirelessly	 to	 encourage	 citizens	 to	 report	 corruption	 without	 fear	 of	
victimisation.	Here	again,	the	Anas’	expose, and	 the	 debate	surrounding it, suggests	 that	
though	 there	 is	 a	 favourable	 and	 enabling	 environment	 for	 investigative	 journalism	 to	
thrive,	robust	measures	to	further	strengthen	mechanisms	for	safe	reporting	of	corruption	
and	crime	are	needed.	
Let	me	take	this	opportunity	to	inform	you	that	10	persons	have	been	convicted	in	relation	
to	 Anas’	 expose	 on	 smuggling	 of	 cocoa,	 while	 two	 were	 acquitted	 by	 the	 court.	 The	
Attorney	 General	 and	 other	 relevant	 stakeholders	 are	 working	 together	 to	 bring	 the	
Witness	 Protection	 Bill	 to	 Parliament	 soon, for	 consideration. I	 also	 urge	 Parliament	 to	
expedite	work	on	 the	Conduct	of	Public	Officers	Bill,	which	is	currently	in	Parliament	and	
also	the	Right	to	Information	Bill,	which	is	also	still	in	Parliament.	
Indeed, I	 think	 the	 Right	 to	Information	 Bill	 by	 the	 time	 it	 is	 passed,	will	go	 down	 in	 the	
history	of	this	country	as	the	longest	bill	ever	under	Parliamentary	consideration..	
The	Whistleblower	(Amendment)	Bill,	which	is	already	before	Parliament,	I	am	told,	will	be	
passed	soon.	
47
The	anti-corruption	and	law	enforcement	agencies	have	meanwhile	begun	discussions	on	
how	 to	coordinate	 their	activities	in	a	manner	 that	 facilitates	effective	investigations	and	
prosecution	of	corruption	and	crime.	
I	am	happy	to	announce	that	the	first	in	a	series	of	Citizens	Complain	Centres	has	been	set	
up	here	in	 the	national	capital.	The	Centre	is	located	in	Room	209	on	 the	2nd floor	of	 the	
Public	 Services	 Commission	 Building	 in	 the	 Ministries	 Area.	 In	 addition	 to	 walk-ins,	 the	
Centre	 receives	 and	 processes	 voice	 complaints	 using	 hotlines	 and	 via	 its	 website,	
www.ghanacitizen.org.
The	Citizens	Complain	Unit	will	collate	data	and	will	produce	quarterly	reports	based	on	the	
type, nature	and	sources	of	complaints	received.	The	report	will	also	include	recommended	
action,	resolution	of	complaints	as	well	as	trend	analysis.	It	is	expected	that	reports	by	the	
Unit	will	 help	 promote	 the	 fight	against	 corruption	as	well	as	improve	 service	 delivery	in	
the	public	sector.		
If	 it	 proves	 successful,	 the	 Citizens	 Complain	 Unit	 will	 be	 replicated	 in	 all	 the	 regional	
capitals.	
District	 Assemblies	 are	 also	 encouraged	 to	 establish	 their	 own	 Units	 in	 their	 district	
capitals.
Mr.	Speaker,
The	Sole	Commissioner	on	 Judgment	Debts	concluded	his	work	and	presented	his	report.	
Since	then	a	White	Paper	has	been	published	for	implementation. The	Sole	Commissioner’s	
report	 reveals	 the	 weaknesses	 in	 our	 systems	 and	 also	 shows	 how	 some	 persons	 in	
collusion	 with	 public	 officers	 deliberately	 fleeced	Government	 of	 hundreds	 of	 billions	 of	
Ghana	Cedis	and	in	some	cases	US	Dollars.		
Even	 before	 the	 presentation	 of	 the	 report,	 the	 Attorney-GeneraL upon	 my	 directive	
commenced	a	robust	defence	of	several	cases	of judgment	debts.	This	action	has	paid	off	
with	massive	savings	recorded.	In	2015	alone,	as	much	as	US$900	million	in	claims	against	
the	state	were	successfully	and	effectively	defended	internationally.	In	domestic	cases,	last	
year	alone,	the	Attorney	General’s	Department	successfully	resisted	claims	of	over	US$100	
million.	
Our	 greatest	 success	 in	 the	 fight	 against	 corruption	must	 be	 based	 on	 preventing	 it.	We	
must	 speed	up	 the	use	of	 technology	 to	 remove	much	of	human	discretion	in	our	public	
service	transactions.	We	must	move	 from	a	cash-based	society	into	a	cashless	one	where	
transactions	 are	 handled	 using	 electronic	 settlement	 platforms	 rather	 than	 lugging	 huge	
amounts	of	cash	about.	I	have	discussed	with	the	Governor	of	the	Bank	of	Ghana	and	asked	
for	a	road	map	to	achieve	this	target	by	the	year	2020.
There	is	a	political	risk	any	Government	runs	in	facing	up	to	corruption	and	fighting	it - the	
paradox	of	exposure - where	an	open,	transparent	approach	to	fighting	corruption	leads	to	
an	erroneous	impression	that	corruption	is	more	pervasive	and	prevalent	at	a	certain	point	
48
than	another.	This	is	a	 risk	my	Government	has	accepted	 to	 take	and	a	challenge	we	are	
willing	to	confront.
In	this	fight,	concocted	allegations	and	other	salacious	fabrications	anonymously	circulated	
on	social	media	under	 the	masthead	of	 fake	newspapers	do	not	help.	They	 rather	hinder	
the	fight,	making	it	difficult	to	differentiate	what	is	truth,	and	what	is	political	propaganda.
Similarly,	 sweeping	 and	 generalised	 conclusions	 drawn	 on	 the	 basis	 of	 scanty	 and	 often	
misleading	 information	 ought	 to	 be	 guarded	 against.	 Corruption	 has	 serious	 implications	
for	any	society’s	advancement.	For	that	reason	the	push	against	it	cannot,	and	must	not,	be	
ceded	to	those	whose	only	motivation	is	electoral	advantage. I	wish	to	strongly	restate	the	
political	 will	 of	 my	Government,	 working	 with	 our	 internal	 and	 external	 partners,	 in	 the	
fight	against	corruption.
LEGISLATURE	AND	JUDICIARY
Mr.	Speaker,
Good	governance	and	 the	 fight	against	corruption	rest	not	only	on	 the	Executive	and	the	
general	public,	but	also	the	Legislature	and	the	Judiciary.	In	the	course	of	their	duties,	the	
second	and	third	arms	of	Government	are	called	upon	to	perform	tasks	that	will	advance	
the	frontiers	of	democratic	practice	in	our	nation.	
However,	as	I	observed	earlier, the	image	of	 the	 Judiciary	was	brought	 to	a	near	all-time	
low	with	 the	Anas	exposures.	As	 nerve-wracking	as	 this	incident	was,	it	also	 presented	a	
story	 of	 hope.	Hope,	 in	 the	 fact	 that	 there	were	a	 significant	 number	 of	judges	who	 not	
only	threw	Anas out,	but	also	threatened	to	call	the	Police	on	him.	It	shows	that	we	have	
many	judges	on	the	bench	who	are	upright	and	have	great	integrity.
We	commend	Her	Ladyship	the	Chief	Justice	for	her	courage	and	determination	in	dealing	
with	the	matter	as	required	by	law.	The	Chief	Justice	and	her	team	have	worked	hard	to	try	
to	restore	the	image	of	the	institution.	We	will	work	with	her	to	ensure	that	we	implement	
any	 other	 structural,	 institutional	 or	 human	 reforms	 required	 to	 make	 the	 Judiciary	 an	
institution	Ghanaians	can	be	proud	of.
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 provision	 of	adequate	 security	 to	 Parliament	and	Honourable	Members	 is	 of	 utmost	
priority	 to	Government.	The	 recent	murder	 of	 our	Honourable	colleague	 raises	again	 the
discussion	 in	 respect	 of	 what	 the	 suitable	 accommodation	 for	 an	 MP	 should	 be -
concentrated	 or	 scattered?	Concentrated	accommodation	 in, say, a	 Parliamentary	 village	
ensures	better	security.	Scattered	is	more	difficult	to	secure.	
With	respect	to	the	security	of	the	precincts	of	Parliament,	I	have	authorised	the	release	of	
the	Western	Gate	Security	Post	of	the	State	House	to	Parliament	for	use	as	a	Police	Station.	
The	facility	has	been	refurbished	with	modern	policing	equipment	and	is	ready	for	use.	
49
We	have	also	installed	a	Digital	Surveillance	System	with	over	400	CCTV	cameras	and	it	is	
currently	being	manned	by	a	detachment	 from	the	Criminal	Investigations	Department	of	
the	Ghana	Police	Service.
I	encourage	the	Leadership	of	Parliament	to	liaise	with	the	Security	Agencies	to	fashion	out	
appropriate	arrangements	to	ensure	the	safety	of	members	of	this	august	House.
ENHANCING	RULE	OF	LAW	&	JUSTICE
Mr.	Speaker,
With	 the	 challenge	 to	 the	 constitutionality	 of	 the	 constitutional	 review	 procedure	
dismissed	 by	 the	 Supreme	 Court,	 we	 will	 work	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 constitutional	 review	
process	is	brought	to	closure	and	that	the	Constitution	Review	Implementation	Committee	
is	able	to	proceed	with	its	mandate.
With	the	commissioning	of	both	Job	600	and	the	Courts	Complex,	we	can	all	rest	assured	
that	all	the	three	arms	of	Government	have	now	been	properly	accommodated	to	carry	out	
our	work.	But	let	us	always	remember that it	is	said	that, “to	whom	much	is	given,	much	is	
expected”.	Our	people	expect	much	from	us.	
My	 understanding	 also	 is	 that,	 this	 year	 we	 will	 design	 and	 start	 construction	 of	 a	 new	
block	 to	cater	 for	 the	extra	 23	members	of	 Parliament	who	cannot	be	accommodated	in	
the	tower	block	complex.	
Mr.	Speaker,
The	 late	 President	 John	 Evans	 Atta	 Mills	 is	 our	 first	 and	 only	 President	 to	 have	 died	 in	
office.	 It	 is	 important	 that	 fitting	 memorials	 are	 established	 in	 his	 honour.	 The	 Ghana	
Institute	 of	 Management	 and	 Public	 Administration	 (GIMPA)	 has	 established	 the	 John	
Evans	 Atta	 Mills	 Centre	 for	 Law	 and	 Governance.	 This	 year,	 the	 John	 Evans	 Atta	 Mills	
Memorial	Library	of	the	University	of	Cape	Coast	will	also	become	operational.	
Government	will	support	these	two	institutions	to	ensure	that	the	vision	and	the	ideals	of	
this	great	academic	and	political	leader are	not	lost.
Mr.	Speaker,
This	 year	 is	 an	 election	 year	 and	 all	 of	 us	must	 give	 the	 utmost	 support	 to	 the	 Electoral	
Commission	to	carry	out	its	work.	Our	Electoral	Commission	has	gained	commendation	all	
over	the	world	for	the	good	work	that	it	has	done	over	the	years	since	the	promulgation	of	
the	1992	Constitution.	We	have	held	6	successful	elections	and	I	have	absolutely	no	doubt	
that	our	electoral	commission	will	 rise	 to	 the	occasion	 to	deliver	a	7th successful	election	
come	November	this	year.	
It	 is important	 for	 all	 of	 us	 to	 support	 the	 Commission	 to	 be	 able	 to	 put	 in	 place	 the	
processes	that	will	make	this	election	successful.	I	call	on	all	political	parties	to	do	exactly	
that.	
Mr.	Speaker,
50
I	pledge	as	President	to	do	everything	in	my	power	to	work	for	a	free,	fair	and	transparent	
election.	Every	support	that	can	be	given	to	the	Electoral	Commission	by	Government,	we	
will	give	to	ensure	that	they	are	able	to	carry	out	their	mandate.	Let	the	election	be	clean	
and	devoid	of	insults.	
Mr.	Speaker,
I want,	on	behalf	of	all	Ghanaians,	to salute	the	media	for	the	good	work	they	have	been	
doing	in	communicating	our	voices	to	the	electorate.	I	believe	that	as	they	have	done	in	the	
last	6	elections,	this	year, again, they	will	be	a	useful	conduit	for	sending	the	messages	of	
political	parties	to	the	electorate.	
I	wish	to	ask	the	media	to	be	circumspect	in	the	use	of	language,	and	to	avoid	insults.	Let	
us	tell	the	Ghanaian	people	what	we	intend	to	do	for	them	and	let	them	make	their	choice.	
DECENTRALISATION
Mr.	Speaker,
Having	 decentralised	 our	 governance	 system	 to	 this	 point	 where	 functions,	 functionaries	
and	 funds	 have	 been	 deployed	 to	 the	 Metropolitan,	 Municipal	 and	 District	 Assemblies	
(MMDAs),	 Government	 and	 the	 citizenry	 expect	 the	 local	 authorities	 to	 reciprocate	 by	
being	more	responsive	to	the	needs	of	their	communities.	
We	 expect	 the	MMDAs	 to	 work	 towards	 financial	 independence	 through	 innovation	 and	
application	 of	 efficiency	 measures.	 We	 expect	 them	 to	 go	 beyond	 the	 naming	 of	 the	
streets,	which	they	have	done	creditably	well,	to	numbering	the	houses	and	developing	a	
comprehensive	database	for	policy	planning	and	emergency	response.
The	 street	 naming	 policy	 has	 largely	 been	 implemented;	 we	 need	 to	 speed	 up	 the	 next	
phase	 of	 numbering	 all	 houses	 and	 creating	 GIS	 maps	 of	 all	 our	 communities.	 District	
assemblies	should	be	able	to	create	a	database	of	all	this	information	for	the	purposes	of	
effective	revenue	mobilisation	and	provision	of	social	services.
Mr.	Speaker,
This	 year	 will	 be	 the	 second	 year	 of	 implementation	 of	 a	 Five-Year	 Phase	 Two	 of	 the	
Decentralization	Policy	Framework	and	National	Decentralization	Action	Plan	(2015-2019).	
We	remain	committed	to	implementing	the	activities	agreed	upon.	
Mr.	Speaker,
Bills	 to	 decentralise	 the	 following	 Departments	 by	 devolution	 and	 converting	 them	 into	
Departments	 of	 District	 Assemblies	 have	 been	 finalised	 and	 will	 be	 placed	 before	
Parliament	in	the	first	quarter	of	2016.
1.	Registry	of	Births	and	Deaths
2.	Ghana	Library	Board
3.	National	Youth	Authority
4.	National	Sports	Authority
5.	Department	of	Cooperatives
51
6.	Department	of	Town	and	Country	Planning
7.	Ghana	Education	Service
8.	Ghana	Health	Service
The	Consolidated	Decentralised	Local	Governance	Bill	will	also	be	laid	before	Parliament	in	
the	 course	 of	 the	 year.	 A	 Local	 Government	 (Borrowing)	 Bill	 will	 also	 be	 laid	 before	
Parliament	 that	 will	 enable	 MMDAs	 to	 borrow	 for	 infrastructure	 projects	 and	 municipal	
services	delivery	without	incurring	liability	for	the	Government.
SECURITY	AGENCIES
Mr.	Speaker,
Over	 the	 past	 few	 years	we	 have	embarked	 upon	a	 progressive	 retooling	 of	 our	 security	
agencies.	We	 have	 provided	 them	 with	 vehicles,	 accommodation,	 logistics	 and	 resources	
that	enable	them	to	fulfill	their	constitutional	mandate.	
We	 will	 continue	to	 place	 priority	 on	 their	 needs	 in	 order	 to	 place	 them	 in	 a	 favourable	
position	to	carry	out	their	duty	of	confronting	and	defeating	crime,	including	cross	border	
crime,	narcotics,	arms	trafficking	and	terrorism.
Lately	 the	 Police	 Service	 has earned	 the	 admiration	 of	 the	 nation	 for	 the	 dexterity	 with	
which	they	tracked	down	and	arrested	Arthur	Simpson	Kent	who	fled	from	Britain	to	Ghana	
after	allegedly	committing	murder.	The	speed	with	which	the	suspect	in	the	J.B.	Danquah	
Adu	 murder	 was	 nabbed	 has	 also	 earned	 the	 Service	 plaudits.	 We	 hope	 the	 Police	 will	
deepen	this	investigation	to	unravel	all	the	unanswered	questions	surrounding	this	case.	In	
the	 mean	 time	 I	 will	 urge	 the	 public	 to	 desist	 from	 making	 wild,	 unsubstantiated	
allegations.	
Mr.	Speaker,
Ghana	continues	 to	participate	in	peacekeeping	efforts	in	 the	West	Africa	sub-region	and	
on	the	African	continent	as	well	as	other	parts	of	the	world,	as	her	contribution	to	ensuring	
peaceful	 resolution	 of	 disputes	 and	 elimination	 of	 threats	 to	 international	 peace	 and	
security	posed	by	conflict	zones	around	the	world.
We	have	deployed	infantry	battalions	to	Liberia	and	Cote	d’Ivoire	and	aviation	units	in	Mali	
and	 Cote	 d’Ivoire.	 An	 engineering	 company	 has	 been	 deployed	 in	 Mali,	 and	 we	 are	
participating	 in	 UN	 peacekeeping	 missions	 in	 DR	 Congo,	 South	 Sudan	 and	 Lebanon.	 The	
Police	 deployed	 170	 personnel	 from	 the	 Formed	 Police	 Unit	 to	 South	 Sudan	 in	 August	
2015.	 Due	 to	 the	 high	 performance	 of	 the	 contingent,	 the	 UN	 has	 requested	 for	 an	
additional	100	personnel	from the	Unit	who	are	to	be	deployed	in	the	first	week	of	March	
2016.
Mr.	speaker,
As	I	said,	2016	is	an	election	year	and	we	are	confident	 that	all	our	security	agencies	will	
join	 hands	 once	again	 to	 secure	 the	 peace	and	 stability	 of	 our	 nation	 before,	 during	and	
after	the	November	7	general	election.
52
FOREIGN	RELATIONS
Mr.	Speaker,
My	 understanding	 is	 that	 the	 Minister	 for Foreign	 Affairs	 presented	 a	 comprehensive	
statement	on	GITMO	 to	 this	House.	And	you	exhausted	yourselves questioning	her	on	all	
aspects	of	the	matter.		I	will	therefore	not	repeat	what	she	said.	
Mr.	Speaker,
The	world	we	live	in	 today	is	a	world	 that	has	become	a	more	integrated	and	connected	
place,	that	creates	both	challenges	and	opportunities	for	our	dear	nation.		It	is	important	as	
we	 seek	 to	 build	 stronger	 relations	 with	 our	 friends	 and	 allies	 that	 we	 take	 this	 into	
consideration.	
We	 must	 also,	 as	 a	 leading	 nation	 on	 the	 West	 Coast	 of	 our	 continent,	 live	 up	 to	 our	
principles	and	our	ideals	that	have	informed	our	Foreign	Policy	since	our	independence	and	
continue	 to	 do	 so,	 because	 those	 ideals	 are	 as	 relevant	 today	 as	 they	 were	 at	 our	
independence. Our	 First	 President	 charged	 that	 Africa	 should	 unite	 because	 in	 unity	 lies	
strength,	we	are	far	from	that	but	there	are	steps	we	can	take	as	a	country	that	can	bring	
Africa	closer	to	us,	and	create	economic	opportunities	as	we	do	so	for	our	citizens.	
Earlier	this	year	at	the	Executive	Council	Meeting	of	the	African	Union	it	was	decided	that	
AU	Member	States	should	review	their	internal	and	external	security	situations	with	a	view	
to	putting	in	place	the	mechanisms	that	would	allow	for	the	issuance	of	visa's	on	arrival	for	
citizens	of	AU	member	states,	with	the	option	to	stay	in	the	country	for	up	to	30	days.	
Mr.	Speaker,	
We	 believe	 creating	 opportunity	 for	 the	 mobility	 of	 people	 on	 our	 continent	 is	 key	 to	
unlocking	our	economic	potential.	Today	within	some	of	our	regional	organisations,	in	our	
case	 the	 ECOWAS,	 and	 in	 a	 number	 of	 countries	 such	 as	 Kenya,	 Seychelles,	 Mauritius,	
Rwanda	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 travel	 without	 having	 to	 obtain	 a	 visa	 before	 visiting	 another	
member	state.	
But	 by	 and	 large,	 traveling	 across	 our	 continent	 is	 a	 hassle.	 Indeed	 for	 those	 African	
businessmen	 and	 women	 trying	 to	 do	 business	 on	 our	 continent,	 it's	 actually easier	 for	
them	 to	 operate	 within	 the	 Schengen	 Area	 of	 the	 European	 Union	 than	 it	 is	 to	 travel	
around	 our	 continent. Africa	 has	 a	 growing	 and	 dynamic	 middle	 class	 that	 is	 both	
entrepreneurial,	 forward	 looking	 and	 has	 purchasing	 power	 and	 we	 intend	 to	 make it	
easier	for	them	to	enter	our	country.	
Mr.	Speaker,		
With	effect	from	July	this	year,	we	will	be	allowing	citizens	of	AU	member	states	to	enter	
into	our	country	and	obtain	visas	on	arrival	with	the	option	to	stay	for	up	to	thirty	days	and	
experience	 what	 our	 country	 has	 to	 offer.	 This	 measure, with	 time	 should	 stimulate	 air	
travel,	trade,	investment	and	tourism.	
We	have	managed	movement	within	and	out	of	our	country	with	citizens	of	the	ECOWAS	
member	 states	 so	 we	 have	 the	 capacity	 to	manage	 this	 new regime.	We	 also	 know	 that	
53
there	may	be	persons	from	our	continent	who	we	may	not	want	to	admit	into	our	country,	
and	hence	the	provision	for	obtaining	visas	on	arrival	and	not	visa-free	entry.	
This	will	enable	the	Ghana	Immigration	Service	to	make	a	determination	as	to	whether	to	
allow	them	entry	or	not into	our	country.
Mr.	Speaker,	
In	doing	this,	we	are	taking	up	the	needed	leadership	of our	Founder’s	dream	of	bringing	
the	citizens	of	the	African	continent	closer	together.
Mr.	Speaker,	
This	year, we	will	also	commence	negotiations	for	the	creation	of	a	Continental	Free	Trade	
Area	 by	 2017,	 and	 we	 will	 be	 actively	 participating	 in	 the	 negotiations	 with	 a	 view	 to	
creating	the	economic	basis	for	a	more	united	and	integrated	continent.	
The	 target	 we	set	 ourselves	 as	 a	 continent	 here	 in	 Accra	 in	 November	 2011, during	 the	
African	 Trade	 Ministers	 meeting, is	 an	 ambitious	 one,	 but	 is	 certainly	 not	 beyond	 our	
capability	 and	 we	 will	 continue	 to	 play	 a	 leading	 role	 towards	 realising	 our	 goal	 of	
promoting	an	integration	of	the	states	and	people	of	this	great	continent.
Last	 year,	 just	 before	 the	 UN	 General	 Assembly,	 the	 world	 saw	 the	 launch	 of	 the	
Sustainable	Development	Goals.	The	goals	set	an	ambitious	agenda	for	the	development	of	
all	 the	 countries	 of	 the world	 so	 that for	 the	 next	 fifteen	 years	 we	 will	 collectively	 work	
together	to	create	the	world	that	we	want	to	see.	We	also, at	the	COP	21	summit	in	Paris,
came	to	a	historic	agreement	on	reducing	carbon	emissions	and	fighting	Climate	Change.	
Mr.	Speaker,	
The	two	are	not	mutually	exclusive	and	we	look	forward	to	incorporating	the	elements	of	
these	two	important	multilateral	and	global	policy	initiatives	into	our	national	planning	and	
programme	implementation.
Mr.	Speaker,	
I	was honoured	to	be	appointed	the	Co-Chair	of	the	UN	Secretary	General's	SDG	Advocates	
Group.		This	is	not	just	an	honour	for	me;	it	is	an	honour	to	our	country	in	recognition	of	
our	leadership	in	peacekeeping,	in	managing	crisis	such	as	the	Ebola	outbreak	that	hit	our	
region	two	years	ago,	our	leadership	on	our	continent	in	promoting	democracy	and	good	
governance,	and	our	leadership	in	positively	transforming	the	lives	of	our	people	over	the	
period	of	implementation	of	the	Millennium	Development	Goals.	
It	is	important	that	we	draw	our	continent's	attention	to	the	need	to	incorporate	the	SDG's	
into	our	National	Development	Plans	as	we	think	and	plan	for	the	future	we	want	to	create	
for	the	next	generation.	
I	will	be	working	with	other	members	of	the	advocacy	group	and	roping	in	other	advocates	
from	our	continent	with	an	emphasis	on	bringing	on	board	young	people	and	women	 so	
54
that	the	SDG's	become	part	of	our	discourse	and	engage	our	collective	attention	as	we	plan	
towards	the	development	of	the	continent.
Mr.	Speaker,	
We	will	begin	the	implementation	of	our	linguistic	pact	with	La	Francophonie,	and	through	
this	process	encourage	our	citizens	at	all	levels	to	become	bi-lingual	in	French	and English.
When	we	consider	that	with	our	immediate	neighbours	our	combined	populations	create	a	
market	of	74	million	people,	and	we	already	engage	in	 trade	and	social	interactions	with	
each	other	both	formally	and	informally,	it	is	time	for	us	to	make	an	extra	effort	to	be	able	
to	 engage	 them	 and	 the	 other	 francophone	 states	 within	 our	 ECOWAS	 region	 more	
effectively	 to	 promote trade	 in	 goods	 and	 services,	 tourism	 and	 investments	 within	 our	
region.	
Mr.	Speaker,	
This	 year,	 we	 will	 continue	 to	 play	 an	 active	 role	 within	 our	 ECOWAS	 region,	 on	 the	
continent,	within	the	Commonwealth	under	the	leadership	of	our	new	Secretary	General	-
Patricia	 Scotland - and	 within	 the	United	Nations	 and	 its	 various	 agencies, especially	 the	
Human	Rights	Council	and	UNESCO, where	we	are	members	 of	 the	Executive	 Board.	We	
will play	an	active	leadership	role	in	creating	the	world	we	want.
55
CONCLUSION
Mr.	Speaker,
I	 began	 this	 address	 with	 an	 admission that	 politicians talk	 a	 lot	 - as	 I	 have,	 no	 doubt,	
proven	 here	 today - but	 that	 our	 words	 sometimes	 fail	 us	 because	 they	 do	 not	 always	
accurately	reveal	the	human	faces that	inform	our	ideas	and	benefit	from	the	programmes	
and	policies	we	enact.
When	I	was	elected	President,	I	stated	that	my	mission	during	my	term	in	office	would	be	
to	transform	Ghana. It	is	certainly	an	admirable	goal,	but	even	to	my	own	ears	it	sounded	
like	a	huge	and	lofty	undertaking. I	suppose	if	one	looks	at	it	as	a	single	undertaking,	it	does	
seem	intimidating,	perhaps	even	impossible.
But	transformation	is,	by	its	very nature,	an	elusive	process. It’s	a	process	by	which	change	
takes	place	in	graduation,	in	small	and	almost	imperceptible	movements	and	occurrences.
Sometimes	 all	 that	 is	 noticeable	 is	 the	 before	 and	 the	 after,	 but	 not	 the	 process	 in	
between.
Mr.	Speaker,
We	are	always	in	motion,	even	when	we	believe	ourselves	to	be	standing	still. The	Earth	is	
always	spinning	on	its	axis. I	like	to	think	of	our	Transformation	Agenda	in	that	same	way.	
Change	is	happening.	It	is	taking	place. Ghana	is	being	transformed.
I	realise	that saying	so	does	not	make	it	so. But	I	know,	too,	that	seeing	is	always	believing.		
So	look	around	in	this	gallery. I	would	like	to	ask	my	invited	guests	to	please	stand:		Mercy	
Pomaa;	Regina	Haku;	Umar	Mahmud	Mogtar;	Naomi	Appiah	Korang;	Mohammed	Hissan;	
Gertrude	 Ahyia	 Yeboah;	 David	 Aminayire;	 Mohammed	 Awabu;	 Dzidzor	 Kwamuar;	 Apim	
Shulamite;	 Samuel	 Amo	 Tobbin;	 Zenabu	 Sumaila;	 James	 Appiah-Berko;	 Emmanuel	
Aboagye;	Shiraz	Issaku;	Awenini	Apogyanga.
Mr.	Speaker,
This	 is	 Ghana. This	 is	 every	 tribe	 and	 ethnicity. It	 is	 every	 religious	 affiliation. It is	 every	
political	persuasion. It	is	the	young	and	old.	It	is	various	income	levels. This	is	the	process	of	
transformation.	We	are	changing	lives,	one	individual	at	a	time.	We	are	heeding	the	words	
of	 our	 founding	 father,	 Dr.	 Kwame	 Nkrumah,	 and	 looking	 neither	 East	 nor	 West	 but	
forward	into	the	future	that	we	want	for	our	beloved	country.
I	thank	you	for	your	kind	attention.
May	God	bless	this	august	House.
And	may	God	continue	to	bless	our	homeland	Ghana.
56