STATE	OF	THE	NATION	ADDRESS
OPPORTUNITIES	FOR	ALL
DELIVERED	BY	
H.	E.	JOHN	DRAMANI	MAHAMA
PRESIDENT	OF	THE	REPUBLIC	OF	GHANA
TO	THE	
6th PARLIAMENT	OF	THE	4TH REPUBLIC
THURSDAY, FEBRUARY	21,	2013
2
Rt.	Hon.	Speaker	of	Parliament	
Vice	President	Kwesi	Bekoe	Amissah-Arthur
Her	Ladyship	the	Chief	Justice	
Honourable	Members	of	Parliament
My	 presence	 here	 this	 morning	 is	 in	 fulfillment	 of	 Article	 67	 of	 Ghana’s	 Constitution	 which	
requires	the	President	of	the	Republic	of	Ghana	to	deliver	to	Parliament	a	message	on	the	State	
of	the	Nation	at	the	beginning	of	each	session	of	Parliament.	
Mr.	Speaker, permit	me,	to	start	by	extending	on	behalf	of	Ghanaians,	congratulations	to	all	our	
Members	of	Parliament.	In	particular,	I	wish	to	acknowledge	our	newest	Members	of	Parliament	
and	extend	to	all	of	them	a	warm	welcome	of	partnership	in	shaping	the	destiny	of	our	beloved	
country.		As	the	elected	President	of	this	dear	country,	I	wish	to	express	my	personal	gratitude	to	
all	 Ghanaians	 for	 the	 trust	 and	 confidence	 entrusted in	 me.	 I	 am	 fully	 conscious	 of	 the	
expectations	of	our	people	and	I	pledge	to	work	with	a	sense	of	urgency	and	remain	sincere	and	
truthful	at	all	times.		
As	 I	 stated	 on	 January	 7	 when	 I	 took	 the	 oath	 of	 office,	 I	 promised,	 that as	 president	 of	 this	
nation,	“I	will	work	hard	to	place	us	on	the	right	path,	and	I	will	lead	us	over	the	hurdles	and	past	
the	obstacles	that	might	threaten	to	keep	us	from	meeting	our	goals.”	
Mr	 Speaker,	 Ghana	 is	 a	 different	 place	 now	 from	 what	 it	 was	 when	 we	 began	 the	 journey	
towards	democratic	governance.	We	have	come	a	long	way	since	1993	when	the	first	President	
of	the	4th Republic, Jerry	John	Rawlings,	delivered	the	first	State	of	the	Nation	Address	under	the	
4th Republican	Constitution. Ghana’s democratic	credentials	were further	consolidated	with	 the	
election	of	John	Agyekum	Kufuor and	later	Professor	John	Evans	Atta	Mills	of	blessed	memory.	
Mr	 Speaker,	 our	 recent	 Presidential	 and	 Parliamentary	 elections	 have	 been	 adjudged	 by	 both	
domestic	and	international	observers	as	by	far	the	most	credible,	transparent, free	and	fair	since	
1992.	This	shows	that	each	step	of our	democratic	journey	has	been	marked	by	improvements.	As	
Ghanaians,	we	must be	proud	of	this	achievement.	
Mr	Speaker,	the	Electoral	Commission	must	take	much	of	the credit for	this	feat;	since	our	return	
to	constitutional	rule in	1992	the	EC	has	organized	six	successful	elections.	They	have	conferred	
victory	 where	 victory	 was	 due	 without	 fear	 or	 favour	 in	the	 critical	 periods	 of	 2000,	 2008	 and	
2012.	Our	 Electoral	 Commission	 has	 earned, in	 the	 process, an	 enviable	 reputation	 as	 arguably	
one	of	the	best	electoral	institutions	on	the	African	continent.	
Mr.	Speaker,	I	entered	public	service	out	of	a	genuine	desire	to	help	make	a	difference	in the	lives	
of	our	people.	My	vision	for	this	country	is	to	create	a	conducive	national	environment	in	which	
our	children	grow	happily	into	responsible	adults;	where	workers	are	proud	to	work	and	defend	
our	national	values;	where	improved	maternal	health	reduces	the	hazards	of	childbearing;	where	
teachers	 use	 their	 influence	 to	 positively	 mould	 the	 next	 generation;	 a	 Ghana	 in	 which	 we	 all	
create	and	share	in	the	benefits.
Mr	Speaker,	I	believe	that	as	a	country	we	can	achieve	more	by	working	together.	Togetherness	
will	enhance	our	capacity	to	meet	our	urgent	needs;	while	promoting	excellence	and	rewarding	
achievement. Ghana	has	witnessed	impressive	development in	the	last	two	decades.	There	have	
been	 improvements	 in	 roads	 and	 social	 infrastructure	 across	 the length	 and	 breadth	 of	 this
country.	 Health	 facilities	 have	 been	 expanded	 and	 access	 improved, and	 so	 have	 educational	
3
institutions	with	the	private	sector	playing	a	pivotal	role.	In	many	respects, Ghana	has	witnessed	
many	positive	changes	for	which	we	must	all	be	proud.	
Real	challenges	however	remain	even	as	we	have	made	these	advances.	As	a	developing	middleincome
 country,	 there	 is	 still	 a	 lot	 more	 to	 be	 done	 to	 further	 reduce	 poverty,	 expand	
infrastructure	and	provide	more	social	services	for	our	people.	These	challenges	are	formidable,	
but	they	are	insurmountable.	
Mr.	Speaker,	this administration	will	pursue	rapid	economic	development	with	a	sense	of	urgency	
in	order	to	create	new	jobs particularly	for	our	youth.	In	partnership	with	the	private	sector,	we	
will	expand	our	infrastructure	in	a	manner	that	will	accelerate	economic	growth.	
We	 will	 embark	 on	 an	 ambitious	 but	 realistic	 programme	 of	 building	 new	 roads	 and	 bridges;	
expand	electricity	generation	to	energize	our	economy;	increase	access	to	good	drinking	water	
and	quality	healthcare for	 our	 growing	 population; and	improve	 sanitation and	 human	 security
for	all.	We	aim	to	transform	our	schools,	colleges	and	universities	to	meet	the	demands	of	a	new	
age	with	emphasis	on	technology and	innovation.	
Mr.	Speaker,	a	well-designed	and	efficient	public	sector	working	in	partnership	with	the	private	
sector	will	be	instrumental	in	our	objective	to	deliver a	prosperous	nation.	
Over	 the	 next	 four	 years,	 we	 will	 build	 an	 economy	 that	 rewards	 hard	 work	 and	 nurtures	
Ghanaian	entrepreneurs	and	businesses	whose	prospects	will	not	be	tied	to	political	cycles	and	
patronage.	As	President, I	am	firmly	focused	on	these	goals,	because	these	are	the	right	things	to	
do.
Mr. Speaker, In	 my	 first	 term	 as	 President,	 I	 will	 focus	 on	 delivering	 on	 the	 following,	 which	
constitute	the	vital	pillars	underpinning	our	national	development programme.
1. Putting	the	People	First
2. A	Strong	and	Resilient	Economy
3. Expanding	Infrastructure
4. Transparent	and	Accountable	Governance
PILLAR	ONE: PUTTING	PEOPLE	FIRST
Mr. Speaker,	as	a	Social	Democratic	Party,	we	put	people	first.	We	believe	that	our	people	are	our	
most	treasured	asset	and	this	is	what	informs	our	social	development	agenda.	The	thrust	of	our	
social	policy	and	human	development	programme revolves	around	education,	healthcare,	social	
security and	 protection	 for	 the	 vulnerable– women,	 children,	 the	 aged	 and	 people	 with	
disabilities.	We	will	focus	on	and	emphasize	the	productive	and	reproductive	capabilities	of	these	
social	 groupings,	 while	 ensuring	 at	 the	 same	 time	 that	 the	 most	 vulnerable	 in	 our	 society	 are	
effectively	protected.	
Mr.	Speaker,	our	people	need	decent	and	sustainable	jobs	to	lead	meaningful	lives.	Job	creation	
and	gainful	employment	therefore	will	be	at	the	core	of	my	priorities.	I	am	determined	to	expand	
opportunities	 for	 all.	 Our	 policies	 and	 initiatives	 will	 be	 geared	 towards	 facilitating	 sustainable	
employment	generation,	which	will	then	facilitate	economic	growth	and	enhanced	incomes.
I	 have	 directed	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Employment	 and	 Labour	 Relations	 to	 work	 with	 the	 Ghana	
Statistical	 Service	 to	 produce	 quarterly	 labour	 surveys	 to	 inform	 policy	 and	 planning.	 	 These
surveys will	 create	 an	 accurate	 database	 of	the	unemployed	 among	 all categories	 of	 Ghanaian	
society and	 track	 these	 on	 a	 quarterly	 basis.	 It	 will	 also	 ensure	 that	 new	 jobs	 are	 accurately	
4
recorded	 and	 tracked	 while	 making	 it	 possible	 to	 coordinate	 the	 various	 job-creation	 and	
employment	initiatives.		
QUALITY	EDUCATION	
Mr. Speaker,	 our	 quest	 to	 build	 an	 equitable	 society	 in	 which	 the	 productive	 capacities	 of	 our	
people	are	tapped	for	national	development	will	come	to	naught	if	we	do	not	give	our	children	
sound,	meaningful	and	 relevant	 education.	 This	 is	 even	more	 imperative	 in	 today’s	knowledgebased
economy. Any	nation	whose	people	do	not	have	the	required	level	of	education	will	be	left	
behind.	Towards	this	end	we	will:
• Prioritize	and	expand	access	at	all	levels;	
• Aggressively	address	quality	enhancement	and	outcomes	at	all	levels	by	putting	in	place	
measures	 to	 monitor	 quality	 of	 educational	 service	 delivery	 especially	 teaching	 and	
learning	at	all	levels of	our	educational	system;	
• Reward	outstanding	educational	service	providers	to	boost	morale	in	the	sector; and	
• Work	to	improve gender	parity	in	education.
• Encourage	community	participation	in	management	of	schools
• Work	towards	standardization	and	affordability	in	fees.	
Mr.	Speaker,	I	extend	a	hand	of	partnership	to	our	social	partners- the	religious	bodies	with	longstanding
 roles	 in	 the	 provision	 of	 educational	 services	 and private	 sector	 operators	 of	
educational	services- to	engage	in	this	national	reconstruction	exercise	for	expanding	access	and	
improving	quality	of	education	in	Ghana.	
Mr. Speaker,	 with	 specific	 reference	 to	 basic	 education,	 we	 will ensure	that	 every	 child	 gets	 a	
head	 start	 by	 working	 to	 effectively	 and	 practically	 integrate	 kindergarten	 education	 into	 the	
existing	 system.	 To	 this	 end,	 District	 Assemblies	 will	 be	 required	 to	 incrementally	 build	 new	
structures	 in	all	 existing	 public	 schools	 to	 serve	 the	 needs	 of	kindergarten	 education.	We	 shall	
expand	training	of	kindergarten	teachers	to	ensure	that	our	children	all	over	the	country	acquire	
basic	numeracy	and	literacy	skills	before	they	start	primary	education.
It	is	also	the	objective	of	this	government,	to	eliminate	the	remaining	schools	under	trees	by	the	
end	 of	 2016. We	 intend	 to	 enforce	 compulsory	 basic	 school	 attendance	 and	 deepen	 pro-poor	
interventions	 like	 the	 distribution	 of	 free	 school uniforms,	 free	 exercise	 books	 and	 free	
computers.	 The	 school-feeding programme will	 be progressively	 expanded	 to	 all	 public	 basic	
schools	in	rural	communities	to	satisfy	the	basic	nutritional	needs	of	the pupils.	Mr. Speaker,	we	
are	committed	to	tackling	the	greatest	challenges	facing	education	at	the	secondary	level	in	our	
country.	Paramount	among	these	is	a	lack	of	access	occasioned	by	inadequate	space	and	facilities	
for	the	large	number of	qualified	Junior	High	School	graduates.	
To	address	the	limitations	imposed	on	access	to	secondary	education	we	will,	over	the	next	four	
years, construct	a	total	of	two	hundred	new	community	day	Senior	High	schools, giving	priority	
to	 Districts, which	 currently	 lack such	 schools. Mr.	 Speaker,	 this	 level	 of	 aggressive	 expansion	
and	improved access	 to	secondary	education	also	means	 the	need	 for	more	qualified	and	wellmotivated
teachers,	as	well	as	administrative	staff.		In	the	next	few	months,	government	will:
• Roll	 out	 a	 special	 sandwich	 teacher	 educational	 training	 programme targeted	 at	 our	
unemployed	 graduates, in	 preparation	 for	 the	 full	 implementation	 of	 our	 access	 to	
secondary	education	programme.	
• Lead	 a	 process	 to	 modernise	 and	 increase	 the	 number	 of	 colleges	 of	 education	 with	
special	emphasis	on	deprived	areas	and	communities.
• Design	 and	 implement	 a	 distance	 education	 programme for	 teachers	 with	 ten	
decentralized	 satellite	 campuses	 across	 the	 country, taking	 full	 advantage	 of	
5
contemporary	 information	 and	 communication	 technology	 platforms that	 will	 allow	
electronically-shared	access	 to	instructional	and	curriculum	 resources	by	 these	students	
and	staff	in	these	colleges.
• In	 the	 area	 of	 Special	 Education,	 government	 will	 facilitate	 the	 completion	 of	 ongoing	
construction	 of	 Assessment	 Centres and	 equip our	 special	 education	 units	 with	 the	
necessary	 teaching	 and learning	 aids	 including	 devices	 for	 the	 hearing	 and	 visually	
impaired.	In	doing	this	we	intend	to	emphasize	inclusive	education	by	ensuring	that	our	
children	with	special	needs	are	fully	integrated	into	our	society	through	the	educational	
arrangements.	
Government	 will	 provide	 incentives	 for	 special	 educators	 and	 ensure	 our	 children-withspecial-needs
benefit	from	the	advantages	of	modern	technology.	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 this	 year	 we	 will	 initiate	 a	 Bill	 for	 Parliamentary	 consideration	 towards	 the	
establishment	 of	 a	 new	 University	 in	 the	 Eastern	 Region,	 committed	 to	 Sustainable	
Environmental	Development	and	Research.	In	addition we will	begin	the	road	map	for	converting	
our	existing	10	public	polytechnics	into	fully	fledged	technical	universities.
HEALTH	FOR	ALL:
Mr. Speaker,	the	relevance	of	improved	health	services	cannot	be	over	emphasized.	It	augments	
investment	in	all	sectors. A	sick	population	cannot	generate	the	productivity	needed to	maintain	
the	acceleration	of	our	economy.	
Presently,	our	healthcare	system	still	has	personnel	deficits	and	service	deficiencies despite	the	
facility	expansion	and	human	capacity	development	programmes	we	have	been	implementing.	In	
the	next	four	years,	we	will	work	towards	improving	access,	service	quality,	increased	personnel,	
enhanced	working	conditions across	the	various	professions	in	the	health	sector.
In	furtherance	of	our	plan	we	will	undertake	the	following:
1. Construction	 of	 an	 ultra-modern,	 new Teaching	 Hospital	 for	 the	 University	 of	 Ghana
Medical	School.
2. Start	the	processes	for	the	establishment	of	Regional	hospitals	in	the	Eastern	and	Upper	
East	Regions. We	will	continue work	on the	Regional	hospital	project	in	Wa	in	the	Upper	
West	Region.
3. Upgrade	 the	 Central	and	 Volta	 regional	 hospitals	 into	 teaching	 hospitals	to	 expand	 the	
scope	for	training	medical	doctors	and	other	healthcare	specialists.
4. Commence	 work	 on	 12	 new District	 Hospitals	 at	 Dodowa,	 Abetifi,	 Fomena,	 Garu,	
Kumawu,	 Sekondi,	 Salaga,	 Tepa,	 Wenchi,	 Madina.	 The	 refurbishment	 of	 the	 Takoradi	
European	hospital	will	commence	in	earnest.
5. Commence	work	on	a	new	hospital	in	Kumasi	to	decongest	the	KATH
6. Initiate	 work	 on	 phase	 one	 of	 the	 Specialist	 Emergency	 Centre	 at	 Korle-Bu	 Teaching	
hospital.
7. Establish	 an	 additional	 1,600	 CHIPS	 compounds	 across	 the	 country	 by	 the	 end	 of	 2016.	
This	will	be	consistent	with	our	record	over	the	last	four	years.	
6
Mr. Speaker,	 in	 addition,	 we	 will	 initiate	 the	 necessary	 processes	 towards	 the	 construction	 of	
Polyclinics	especially	in	the	Districts	as	well	as	regions	that	currently	lack	such	health	facilities.	In	
embarking	on	this	journey	of	expanding	access,	we	will	also	begin	to	explore	new	modalities	of	
public-private-partnerships	 in	 Health	 investment,	 in	 a	 manner	 that	 brings	 new	 investment,	
expertise	and	technology	into	the	health sector,	providing	citizens	a	variety	of	options	of	where	
they	access	their	health	services.
Mr.	Speaker,	there	is	an	ongoing	 review	of	 the	operations	of	 the	NHIS.	Our	goal	is	 to	 ensure	a	
more	 efficient,	 expanded and	 sustainable	 delivery.	 We	 will	 work	 to	reduce	 cost	 and	 eliminate	
fraud	 in	 the	 system.	 New	 improved	 claims	 processing	 centres	 will	 be	 set	 up,	 and	 improved	 IT	
systems	put	in	place	to	enhance	service	and	create	a	better	platform	for	monitoring	the	scheme.	
Government	 has	 taken	 note	 of	 the	 last	 review	 workshop	 held	 and	 will	 present	 the	
recommendations	 especially	 in	 respect	 to	 sustainable	 financing	 of	 the	 scheme	 to	 cabinet	 for	
consideration. We	 will	 pursue	 the	 implementation	 of	 the	 Mental	 Health	 Act	 in	 order	 to	
mainstream	psychiatric	treatment	and	care	for	our	population	for	our	population.	
Mr.	Speaker,	with	regards	to	the	deficit	in	health	personnel,	we	will	consolidate	the	gains	made	
in	the	training	of	health	care	professionals	through	the	establishment	of	the	University	of	Allied	
and	Health	Sciences	by;
• Transforming	 the	 Kintampo	 Rural	 Health	 Training	 Institute	 into	 a	 University	 College	 to	
support	the	training	of	Physician	Assistants	for	our	ambulance	and	emergency	services	as	
well	 as	 the	 training	 and	 deployment	 of	 clinical	 psychologists	 and	 environmental	Health	
Inspectors.
• Scaling	 up	 the	 training	of	midwives	and	 nurses	and	allied	 health	workers	 to	 fill	 the	 gap	
created	by	ageing	health	professionals.
HIV/AIDS
Mr.	 Speaker,	 Ghana	 has	 made	 significant	 progress	 towards	 achieving	 Universal	 Access	 to	 HIV	
prevention,	treatment,	care	and	support	services	through	the	implementation	of	a	National	HIV	
&	AIDS	Strategic	Plan.	HIV	prevalence	has	stabilized	at	1.5	percent with	over	25	percent decline	in	
new	infections	among	the	youth.	In	2011,	Government	committed	GH¢150	Million	to	support	the	
implementation	 of	 the	 new	 five	 (5)	 year	 strategic	 Plan.	 This	 was	 in	 addition	 to	 government’s	
support	 for	 prevention	 &	 treatment	 services. With	 this	 plan	 we	 intend	 to	 achieve	 virtual	
elimination	of	mother	to	child	transmission	and	cut	the	rate	of	new	infections	by	half.	
This	 year,	 our	 National	 Response	 to	 HIV	 will	 require	 GH¢180	Million	 to	 continue	 with	 effective	
implementation	of	the	Strategic	Plan.	This	funding	will	enable	the	Ghana	AIDS	Commission	enrol	
over	220,000	Persons	Living	with	HIV	on	the	National	Health	Insurance	Scheme	Free	of	Charge.	
Some	 additional	 15,000	 will	 be	 initiated	 on	 Anti-Retroviral	 Therapy.	 Most	 importantly,	 over	
625,000	expectant	mothers	will	be	tested	for	HIV.	
SOCIAL	PROTECTION
Mr.	 Speaker,	 as	 we	 forge	 ahead	 in	 social	 development	 and	 economic	 transformation,	 it	 is	
important	 to	 be	 mindful	 of	 segments	 of	 our	 society	 who,	 for	 reasons	 of	 social,	 cultural	 or	
economic	 circumstances	 become	 vulnerable	 and	 marginalized. It	 is	 for	 this	 reason	 we	 have	
created	the	new	Ministry	for	Gender,	Children	and	Social	Protection. The	Ministry	is	to	coordinate	
and	 implement	 the	 numerous	 Government	 social	 intervention	 programmes	 aimed	 at	 the	 poor	
and	disadvantaged	in	society. Let	me	say	again	for	emphasis,	that	the	mandate of	this	ministry	is	
not	to	promote	gay	rights	as	some	segments	of	society	have	sought	to	portray.	
We	have also	taken stock	of	all	the	existing	social	intervention	programmes,	and	relocated them	
directly	under	the	Ministry	of	Gender,	Children	and	Social	Protection.	This	will	enable	us	develop	
7
a	more	efficient	targeting	mechanism	and	eliminate	duplication	and	manipulation of	the	existing	
fragmented	programmes.
The	new	Ministry	will	have	oversight	of	the	Disability	Council	and	will	take	steps	to	integrate	fully	
our	 challenged	 brothers	 and	 sisters	 in	 the	 mainstream	 of	 national	 life.	 	 We	 have	 shown	 a	
commitment	to	this	by	appointing	Dr.	Dana	as	a	Minister	of	State.	I	have	asked	the	Secretary	to	
the	 Cabinet	and	 the	 Chief	of	 Staff	 to	 take	 note	of	any	 special	 needs	 he	might	 have	 in	order	 to	
allow	him	fully	function	in	his	role	as	Minister.	
The	Ministry	will	establish	a	database	of	the	poorest	households	or	individuals	in	our	society	and	
fashion	programmes	to	enhance	their	access	to	social	services.		This	Ministry	is	at	the	heart	of	our	
being	 as	 social	 democrats.	 The	 fruits	 of	 economic	 growth	 shall	 be	 equitably	 shared	 for	 the	
benefit	of	our	population.	We	cannot	advance	as	a	nation,	half	poor,	and	half	rich.	Our	Minister	
assigned	to	GCSP	is	experienced	and	capable	and	I	am	sure	that	many	will	soon	see	the	results	of	
her	expertise	in	that	sector.
YOUTH	AND	SPORTS	DEVELOPMENT	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 let	me	 now	 turn	my	attention	 to	an	area	 that	 has	 often	 proven	 to	 be	 one	 of	 the	
greatest	unifiers	of	our	people,	sports.	A	few	weeks	ago	we	had	to	endure	the	painful	experience	
of	missing	out	on	our	much-cherished	dream	of	winning	a	fifth	African	Cup	of	Nations	title.	
Our	 Black	 Stars	 exited	 the	 just	 ended	 AFCON	 competition	 at	 the	 semi-final	 stage	 through	 the	
lottery	of	penalty.	I recall	how	barely	a	year	ago,	our	beloved	late	President	Mills	standing	before	
this	august	house	in	his	last	sessional	address,	urged	our	football	authorities	to	take	seriously	the	
issue	 of	 penalty	 taking	 by	 our	 teams	 as	 it	 has	 often	 been	 our	 nemesis	 in	 major	 competitions.	
What	 many	 appreciated	 as	 a	 humorous	 comment	 turned	 out	 to	 be	 prophetic	 as	 the	 same	
problem	came	to	haunt	us	at	the	just	ended	AFCON	competition.
Mr.	Speaker,	I	hope	that	upon	their	return	from	South	Africa,	the	handlers	of	our	National	Team	
have	begun	undertaking	the	necessary	post	mortem	in	order	to	ensure	our	qualification	for	the	
World	Cup	in	Brazil	next	year.	I	request	the	FA	and	the	management	of	the	Stars	to	go	back	to	
the	drawing	board	immediately	and	commence	the	building	of	a	more	formidable	team	that	will	
not	 only	 qualify	 for	 the	 World	 cup	 but	 will	 surpass	 the	 achievements	 of	 their predecessors	 in	
previous	World	Cups.	Another	major	tournament	we	need	to	prepare	for	is	the	Olympic	games	in	
2016.
Mr.	Speaker,	we	are	mindful	of	 the	 fact	 that	poor	planning	and	a	lack	of	adequate	preparation	
can	derail	our	 efforts	 to	qualify	 for	and	participate	 effectively	in	 these	and	other	competitions.	
We	will	roll	out	a	number	of	policies	to	unearth	and	develop	sporting	talents	to	feed	our	various	
National	teams.	These	will	include:
• Provision	 of	 incentives	 for	 MMDAs	 to	 establish	 at	 least	 one	 well-resourced	 sports	 and	
athletic	infrastructure	in	districts.
• Re-invigoration	of	the	traditional	inter-school	and	colleges	sports	competition	programs
• Reserve	some	admissions	 to	Senior	High	Schools	 for	 talented	sports	and	other	creative	
students	among	other	interventions
• Completions	 of	 the	 Cape	 Coast	 Stadium	 as	 promised	 by	 our	 late	 President	 John	 Evans	
Atta	Mills
• Restructuring	 and	 re-orientation	 of	 the	 National	 Sports	 Authority	 to	 enhance	 its	
efficiency	and	effectiveness	in	the	discharge	of	its	mandate
• Development	of	the	lesser	known	sporting	disciplines	among	others.	
8
Mr. Speaker,	 I	 stated	 in	 my	 address	 to	 the	 UN	 General	 Assembly	 last	 year	 that	 the	 youth	 are	
today’s	leaders	and	not	future	leaders.	In	order	to	enable	our	youth	realise	their	full	potential	and	
contribute	 to	 National	 development,	 we	 have	 fashioned	 out	 comprehensive	 programmes	
including	but	not	limited	to:
• A	GH¢10	million	Youth	Jobs	and	Enterprise Development	Fund	which	will	be	launched	to	
encourage	 and	 support	 young	 people	to	 become	 successful	 entrepreneurs	 and	 create	
sustainable	job	opportunities
• Job	 and	 Enterprise	 Centres	 (JEC)	 will	 be	 established	 in	 all	 regions	 to	 help	 unemployed	
youth	and	those	about	to	enter	or	prepare	for	the	world	of	work.
• Develop	 Youth	 Centres	 in	 Districts	 to	 facilitate	 youth	 meetings,	 interactions,	 cultural	
programs,	conferences	and	inputs	into	District	Assemblies’	deliberative	mechanisms	
• Continue	 with	 the	 National	 Youth Achievers	 Awards,	 which	 I	 introduced	 last	 year	 to	
institute and	encourage	Young	Achievers.
• Revamp	 all	 the	 Youth	 Leadership	 Training	 Institutes	 and	 utilize	 them	 for	 year	 round	
training	of	youth	in	leadership,	civics,	patriotism	and	other	nation	building	curricula	
SADA	&	WESTERN	CORRIDOR	
Mr.	Speaker, the	Savannah	Accelerated	Development	Authority	(SADA)	has	agriculture	as	a	key	
part	of	its	agenda.	In	the	spirit	of	Public-Private	Partnership,	SADA	has	facilitated	partnerships	to	
establish	 three	 agro	 processing	 factories- a	 sheanut	 processing	 factory	 at	 Buipe,	 a	 rice	 mill	 at	
Nyankpala	 near	 Tamale	 and	 a	 vegetable	 oil	 mill	 at	 Tamale.	 The	 Produce	 Buying	 Company	 is	
currently	raising	the	capital	to	begin	sheanut	purchases	to	feed	the	factory.	
Mr. Speaker,	 this	 will	 benefit	 tens	 of	 thousands	 of	 poor	 women	 in	 the	 savannah	 zone	 of	this	
country.	Outgrowers	are	being	 registered	 to	meet	 the	 requirements	of	 these	 factories.	In	2011,	
SADA	supported	6,000	farming families Last	year	SADA	registered	and	supported another	16,000	
farmers	 this	year	with	 farm	inputs,	including	 fertilizers,	improved	seeds	and	 tractor services for	
land	 preparation	 services.	 SADA	 through	 its	 greening	 the	 Northern	 Savannah	 ecological	 zone	
agenda,	has	partnered	with	a	private	sector	group	to	grow	and	nurture	5	million	trees	in	the	next	
12	months. This	is	providing	5000	jobs	across	the	North.
Mr.	Speaker,	based	on	the	example	of	SADA,	I	directed	a	team	in	my	office	and	the	NDPC	to	work	
closely	 with	 the	 two	 Regional	 Coordinating	 Councils	 and	 relevant stakeholders	 towards	
establishing	 the	 Western	 Corridor	 Development	 Authority,	 comprising	 Western	 and	 Central	
regions.	The	implementation	framework	for	the	Authority	is	currently	under	development.
Mr.	Speaker,	the	Social	agenda	outlined	above	informs	our economic	policy	which	I	would	like	to	
touch	upon	at	this	juncture.
PILLAR	TWO- A	STRONG	AND	RESILIENT	ECONOMY	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 the	 economy	 of	Ghana	 has	 over	 a	 period	 of	more	 than	 two	 decades	 consistently	
witnessed	a	positive	growth	 rate.	This	back-to-back	growth	 registered	 from	 1986	culminated	in	
the	 attainment	of lower	middle-income	 status in	the	 year	 2010.	 This	 positive	performance	was	
taken	to	a	whole	new	level	in	the	year	2011	when	our	country	registered	what	is	believed	to	be	
probably	the	 highest	 growth rate	 in	 the	world- a	whopping	14.4	 percent	 growth	 in	 GDP. Since	
then	 our	 country	 has	 maintained	 its	 ranking	 among	 the	 10	 fastest	 growing	 economies	 in	 the	
world.
My	 vision	 in	 this	 first	 term	 of	my	 presidency	 is	 to	 work	 to	 sustain	 economic	 growth	 rates	 at	 a	
minimum	 of	 eight percent	 in	 line	 with	 our	 goal	 of	 moving	 our	 country	 from	 a	 lower	 middleincome
status	to	the	full middle-income	bracket. This	we	must	do	as	we	strive	to	achieve	our	set	
social	objectives.	
9
In	the	area	of	macro-economic	stability,	we	have	made	significant	progress.	Inflation	that	for	so	
long	had been	in	double	digits,	has	for	the	first	time	in	our	history	remained	within	single	digit	for	
over	 thirty	 long	 months.	 Apart	 from	 the	 first	 half	 of	 2012,	 when	 the	 cedi	 experienced	 serious	
pressures	 resulting	 from	 a	 huge	 balance	 of	 trade	 deficit,	 the	 currency	 has	 continued	 to	 enjoy	
relative	stability.	
This	 relative	 stability	has	been	boosted	by	 the	 relatively	 strong	 foreign	 reserves	of	 the	country	
that	 have	 increased	 significantly	 from	 about	 $2billion at	 the	 beginning	 of	 2009	 to	the	 current
$5.5billion.	 The	 banking	 sector	 that	 in	 2009	 experienced	 relatively	 high	 non-performing	 loan	
ratios	has	seen	a	marked	improvement	in	its	NPL	 ratio	and	has	seen	increased	profitability	and	
assets	growth.
Mr. Speaker,	 these	macro-economic	 improvements	and	 the	 sustained	 strong	 economic	 growth	
rates	we	have	recorded,	have	made	Ghana	a	very	attractive	destination	for	portfolio and	foreign	
direct	 investment- a	 factor	 which	 is	 critical	 in	 our	 quest	 to	 rapidly	 diversify and	 transform	 our	
economy	and	reduce	our	vulnerability	to	external	shocks.
FISCAL	CHALLENGES
Mr.	Speaker,	the	challenge	facing	us	now	is	a	misalignment	of	the	expenditure	categories	in	the	
Budget namely,	emoluments	(i.e.,	wages,	salaries	and	allowances), goods	and	services	(including	
debt	service),	and	investment	or	capital	expenditure.	This	is	attributable	to	the	following	critical	
factors. It	 is	 important	 to	 appreciate	 the	 fact	 that	 the	 personnel	 emoluments	 portion	 of	 the	
Budget	has	more	 than	tripled	 in the	last three	years,	 from	GH¢2.5	billion	 to	about	GH¢8 billion
this	year.	This	has	been	mainly	due	 to	 the	Single	Spine	Salary	Scheme	 (SSSS).	We	now	spend	a	
staggering	60.9 percent	of	our	entire	national	revenue to	pay	public	sector	salaries.	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 this	 is	 almost	 double	 the	 globally	 accepted	 prudent	 level	 of	 between	 30	 to	 35	
percent.	While	we	remain	committed	to	boosting the	morale	of	public	sector	workers	of	Ghana,	
whose	incomes	were	low	compared	to	their	counterparts	in	the	private	sector.	It	is in	that	spirit	
that	we	undertook	the	salary	rationalization	with	a	view	to	enhancing	fairness,	productivity	and	
motivation	 in	 the	 public	 sector.	We	 now	 face	 the	 challenge	 of	 ensuring	 that	 the	 effect	 of	 the	
public	sector	pay	reform	does	not	constitute	an	unsustainable	burden	on	public	finances	and	on	
macro-economic	stability.	
Mr. Speaker,	the	rate	of	growth	of	the	wage	bill	has	reached	a	point	where	they	are	squeezing	
out	 critical	 investments	 in	 the	 budgetary	 allocation	 of	 goods	 and	 services	 and	 capital	
expenditures.	Unless	we	tackle	this	issue	decisively,	we	may	soon	reach	a	point	where	not much	
will	 be	 left	 to	 provide	 the	 much-needed	 roads,	 bridges,	 ports,	 schools,	 clinics	 and	 water	
infrastructure we	need	to	develop	our	economy.	
This	issue	is	even	more significant	because	as	we	struggle	 to	settle	the	wage	bill,	 thousands	of	
public	workers	continue	to	make	demands	for	wage	increases	and	threaten work	stoppage	if	we	
do	not	meet	these	demands.	
Mr.	Speaker,	the	meat	is	now	down	to	the	bones,	and	it	is	time	for	serious	rethinking	about	the	
level	of	wages	in	relation	to	our	national	competiveness	and	the	related	productivity	issues. It	is	
said	 “to	whom	much	 is	 given,	much	 is	 expected.”	 The	people	of	Ghana	 demand	better	 service	
from	our	public	sector	employees	commensurate	to	the	investment	made	in	their	remuneration.
10
Mr. Speaker,	another	factor	that	led	to	the	large	deficit	was	the significant	shortfalls	in	corporate	
income	taxes	from	the	petroleum	sector	because	of	low	volumes	of	crude	oil	exports.	
In	addition,	there	were	expenditure	overruns	arising	from	borrowing	to	pay	off	large	arrears	and	
major	capital	projects,	notably	the	roads	projects	that	we	now	categorize	as	the	“gang	of	four”	
later	adjusted	to	six.		Happily	many	of	these	roads	are	in	advance	stage	of	completion.
CORRECTIVE	MEASURES
Mr.	Speaker,	we	are	taking	the	difficult	but	necessary	measures	to	address	the	serious	problems	
of	misalignment. The	National	Petroleum	Authority	recently	announced	adjustments	in	the	prices	
of	 petroleum	 products	 to	 realign	 the	 distortions	 in	 the	 pricing	 of	 petroleum	 products.	 These	
distortions	had	resulted	in	a	situation	where	Government	had	to	shell	out	about	GHC150	million
to	the	Bulk	Distribution	Companies	(BDCs)	to	compensate	them	for	losses	sustained	in	the	supply	
of	 petroleum	 products.	 	 The	 net	 effect	 was	 also	 that	 because	 of	 the	 wide	 disparity	 in	 price	
between	 us	 and	 our	 neighbours,	 many	 unscrupulous	 people	 found	 a	 new	 occupation	 in	
smuggling	the	products	across	our	borders	for	sale.	
Our	 primary	 concern	 for	 the poor	 and	 vulnerable	 has	 necessitated	 a	 widening	 of	 mitigation	
measures,	such	as	the	 introduction	of	 solar	lanterns,	 expansion	of	life-line	 threshold	on	 energy	
for	 poor	 households	 and	 deepening	 social	 protection	 initiatives	 to	 cover	 a	 wider	 net	 of	 poor	
households	to	cushion	them	from	the effects of	these	price	increases.
On	the	other	hand	we	are	introducing	measures	to	curtail	Government’s	expenditure	on	fuel.	We	
would	rationalize	the	use	of	government	vehicles	and	fuel	in	the	next	few	weeks.	I	have	given	the	
Chief	 of	 Staff	 appropriate	 directives	 on	 this	 matter. We	 will	 discuss	 with	 auto	 companies	 a	
scheme	 to	enable	Senior	Public	servants	 to	buy	on	hire	purchase	 their	own	vehicles	and	curtail	
the	reliance	on	the	use	of	State	vehicles.
Mr.	Speaker,	we	are	also	taking	strict	measures to	curtail	MDAs	spending	beyond	their	budgetary	
allocations	 and	 new	 mechanisms	 of	 strict	 monitoring	 will	 be	 announced	 by the	 Minister of	
Finance in	the	2013	budget.	
The	Ghana	Revenue	Authority	and	other	agencies	have	been	tasked	to	help	raise	tax	and	non-tax	
revenues	to	levels	that	benefit	our	emerging	Lower	Middle-Income	Country	status. We	will	plug	
the	leakages	and	 raise	Ghana’s	 ratio	of	 revenue	 to	GDP	 from	 the	current	meager	 16%	 to	above	
20%.	 Comparative	 levels	 with	 other	 lower	middle	 income	 countries	 are	 Kenya	 24%	 and	 Senegal	
22%.
Mr.	 Speaker,	 while	 we	 take	 these	 difficult	 measures,	 our	 engagement	 with	 Development	
Partners	(DPs)	through	the	Consultative	Group	(CG)	process	has	focused	on	how	to	manage	the	
transition	to	an	upper	middle-income	status	in	an	orderly	manner	to	balance	the	need	for	growth	
with	 our	 obligations	 of	 reducing	 poverty	 and	 significantly	 meeting targets	 set	 in Millennium	
Development	Goals	(MDGs).
THE	PRIVATE	SECTOR	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 partnership	 with	 the	 private	 sector	 has	 brought	 about	 accelerated	 growth	 and	
development	of	the	economy.		Ghana	improved	from	the	92nd position	in	2009	to	the	63rd in	2012	
on	the	World	Bank’s	“Ease	of	Doing	Business	Index”.	
This	progress	has	to	be	improved	during	the	transition	to Middle-Income	status and	we	are	in	the	
process	of	transforming	the	Ghana	Investment	Promotion	Centre	(GIPC)	to	meet	the	challenges	
of	the	21st Century	Investor.
11
Mr.	 Speaker,	 the	 government	 has	 taken	 a	 decisive	 step	 to	 locate	 private	 sector	 coordination	
under	 the	 Office	 of	 the	 President,	 and	 designated	 a	 Minister	 of	 State	 in	 the	 Presidency	 to	
coordinate	 and	 supervise	 Private-sector	 initiatives.	 In	 this	 effort,	 government	 will	 play	 a	
facilitative	role	for	private	sector	development.		
I	 have	 already	 inaugurated	 the	 Private	 Sector	 Advisory	 Council	 under	 my	 chairmanship,	 and	
decisive	 steps	 are	 underway	 to	 deepen	 the	 implementation	 of	 the	 Private	 Sector	 Development	
Strategy (PSDS) II,	covering	all	major	aspects	of	private	sector	development.
We	will	use	Government’s	significant	procurement	power	to	benefit	the	Ghanaian	Private	Sector.	
As	a	policy,	I	am	requesting	public	officials	to	give	priority	to	the	Ghanaian	private	sector	in	goods	
and	services	where	they	are	competitive	in	value,	quality	and	delivery.	
ACCELERATING	AGRICULTURAL	MODERNIZATION	FOR	JOB-CREATION
Mr.	Speaker, all	of	our	accelerated	development	efforts	have	been	geared	towards	giving	special	
advantage	to	accelerated	agricultural	and	aquaculture	development	through	Modernization.	
The	 process	 of	 modernization,	 involving	 the	 use	 of	 improved	 seed	 varieties,	 greater	 access	 to	
tractor	services	and	training	of	peasant	and	small	holder	farmers	on	productivity	enhancements,	
has resulted	in	dramatic	increases	in	maize,	rice	and	cassava	production	in	the last	four	years.
These	will	be	 expanded	with	an	additional	2,000	 tractors,	improved	 seed	 support	and	 fertilizer	
subsidies,	especially	for	the	poorest	farmers.	
Total	land	 under	 irrigation	 throughout	 the	country	will	 be	 substantially	 increased	as	a	 result	of	
new	initiatives	on	 the	Accra	Plains	and	 the	 Savannah	zone,	under	a	new	World	Bank	 facility	on	
commercial	agriculture	development. This	will	allow	for	all	year	round	farming	and	will	enhance	
Ghana’s	food	security.
Hydroelectric	power	and	irrigation	development	will	receive	further	boost	in	the	Sissilli-Kulpawn	
project	 and	 the	 Pwalugu	 Multi-purpose	 dam	 in	 the	 Upper	 East	 region. These	 two	 projects	 are	
expected	to	bring	some	80,000	hectares	of	land	under	irrigation	in	the	Northern	belt.
A	more	 coherent focus	 on	 fisheries	 and	 aquaculture	 development	 has	 been	 initiated,	 with	 the	
designation	 of	 a	 new	 Ministry	 for	 Fisheries	 and	 Aquaculture Development and	 the	 imminent	
establishment	of	a	college	of	Fisheries	planned	for	Anomabo	as	a	department	of	the	University of	
Cape	Coast.
COCOA
Mr. speaker,	our	focus	is	to	work	towards	achieving	sustainable	production	of	the	historic	one	
million	tonnes	of	cocoa.	 The	key	measures	we	have	identified	to	accomplish	this	are	the	
continued	payment	of	at	least	70%	of	the	world	market	price	of	cocoa	to	farmers,	the	distribution	
of	20	million	hybrid	cocoa	seedlings	free	of	charge	over	the	next	several	years.	Additionally	we	
will	also	pursue	the	continued	application	of	the	hi-tech	system	to	increase	yield	per	hectare. We	
are	also	reviewing	the	current	distribution	system	of	subsidized	inputs	to	ensure	that	these	reach	
the	farmers	directly.	
MANUFACTURING	
We	will	marshal	the	collective	effort	of	all	stakeholders	to	facilitate	the	emergence	and	growth	of	
12
a	strong	manufacturing	sector:-
1.				 By	 reviewing	 the	 tax	 structure	 to	 reduce	 taxes	 paid	 by	 Ghanaian	 manufacturers	 to	
increase	their	competitiveness	in	the	national	and	world	market.
2.				 Facilitate	 the	 establishment	 of	 an	 industrial	 development	 fund	 to	 provide	 a	 ready	
resource	envelope	for	ailing	and	struggling	manufacturing	industries	in	Ghana.
3.				 Provide	 service	 plots within	 dedicated	 industrial	 zones	 to	 be	 developed	 in	 Sekondi	
Takoradi,	Tema,	Kumasi	and	Tamale	to	support	the	local	manufacturing	companies	to	
add	value	to	local	products	for	a	strong	and	viable	domestic	manufacturing	sector.
Mr. Speaker,	work	is	ongoing	on	a	$1.2	billion	ammonia-urea	based	fertilizer	processing	plant	with	
an	annual	capacity	of	one	million	tons	in	Nyankrom	in	the	Shama	District	of	the	Western	Region.	
This	 is	 an	 initiative	 between	 the	 Ghana	 and	 Indian Governments with	 a	 potential	 for	 boosting	
trade,	jobs	creation,	and	increased	agricultural	productivity.
TOURISM,	CULTURE	AND	CREATIVE	ARTS
Mr.	 Speaker, our	 government	 is	 committed	 to	 using	 Tourism	 as	 an	 instrument	 for	 the	 full	
realization	of	the	economic	potential	of	our	culture	and	creative	arts.		In	this	respect:
• The	 newly	 aligned	 Ministry	 of	 Tourism,	 Culture	 and	 the	 Creative	 Arts	 will facilitate	 the	
interface	between	government,	implementing	bodies	in	tourism,	culture	and	the	creative	
industries	as	well	as	international	and	civil	society	partners.
• The	 National	 Commission	 on	 Culture	 is	 being	 restructured	 as	 the	 government’s	 lead	
implementing	 and	 advisory	 body	 on	 Culture	 and	 Creative	 Arts;	 and	 the	 Ghana	 Tourism	
Authority	will	be	similarly	transformed.	
• Government	will	allocate	funds	to	the	sector and	mainstream	the	creative	arts	industry	as	
an	integral	part	of	the	Ghanaian	private	sector.
PILLAR	THREE:	EXPANDING	INFRASTRUCTURE
Mr.	 Speaker, all	 Ghanaians	 deserve	 to	 live	 in	 a	 country	 with	 improved	 infrastructure,	 which	 is	
inextricably	linked	to	enhancing	the	quality	of	life.	
The	 viability	 of	 private	 sector	 investments	 hinges	 on	 a	 robust	 and functional	 infrastructure	 of	
roads,	 rail,	 sufficient	and	 efficient	 energy,	 stable	water	 supply	and	a	 seamless	 communications	
and	ICT	infrastructure.	
Mr.	 Speaker, government	 will	 use	 information	 technology	 to	 support	 infrastructure	
development,	urban	renewal,	land	use	management	and	environmental	protection.	
Mr.	Speaker,	Ghana	was	listed	by	the	International	Telecommunication	Union	(ITU)	as	one	of	the	
top	 ten	 most	 dynamic	 performing	 countries	 in	 ICT-for-development	 in	 2011.	 Indeed,	 telephone	
subscription	 in	Ghana	 reached	close	 to	26million as	of December	2012,	 representing	more	 than	
double	the	number	as	of	December	2008.
Government	 will	 continue	 with	 the	 positive	 outlook	 and	 promote	 the	 rapid	 development	 of	
broadband	 infrastructure	 to	 reach	 all	 parts	 of the	 country	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 improved	
connectivity	 provides	 better	 access	 to	 health	 care	 and	 health	 information,	 opportunities	 for	
13
education	 and	 training,	 transportation,	 protection	 of	 environment	 and	management	 of	 natural	
resources,	and	to	support	E-govt	to	create	transparency	in	government.
In	pursuit	of	this,	the	work	on	the	Eastern	Corridor	Rural	Fibre	Optic	backbone	network	project	
will	be	accelerated	to	add	584	kilometres	of	optic	fibre	stretching	from	Ho to	Bawku and	linking	
70	towns	enroute	to	improve	the	quality	of	communications	services.	
With	 the	 ICT	 sector	 expanding at	 such	 a	 rapid	 rate,	 attention	 will	 be	 focused	 on	 measures	 to	
protect	the	privacy	of	the	individual	and	personal	data.	We	will	also	develop	strategies	to	counter	
the	 growing	 threats	 of	 cyber	 attacks	 and	 other	 online	 security	 concerns	 and	 accelerate	
preparations	 towards	 migration	 from	 Analogue	 to	 Digital	 Television	 Transmission.	 The	 Better	
Ghana	ICT	Project	will	be	given	a	major	boost	 this	year.	We	shall	commence	 the	distribution of	
Four	Hundred	Thousand	(400,000)	laptop	computers	to	schools	and	students.	
ROADS	
I	have	clear plans	for	the	roads	and	transport	sector,	which	we	will	start	implementing	this	year.	
These	 include	 the	 introduction	 of	 public-private	 partnership	 models	 on	 commercially	 viable	
routes	along	the	Western,	Eastern	and	Central	Corridor	roads.
Work	 is	 soon	 commencing	 on	 the	 Northern	 segment	 of	 the	 Eastern Corridor	 road,	 stretching	
from	Oti	Damanko	to	Nakpanduri.
This	 year	 we	 expect	 to	 bring	 to	 a	 significant	 point	 of	 completion many	 of	 the	 ongoing	 road	
projects	including	the	Kpando- Worawora- Dambai,	Asankragwa- Enchi,	Navrongo- Tumu	and	the	
Achimota- Ofankor,	Madina- Pantang,	Nsawam- Suhum-Apedwa,	La- Teshie,	Dansoman and	 the	
Apaaso- Kintampo	roads.
Others	 are	 the	 Sefwi	 Bekwai- Eshiem- Asankragwa,	 Bomfa	 Junction- Asiwa- Bekwai,	 Tetteh	
Quarshie-Madina and the	Berekum- Sampa	roads.	
We	will	embark	on	a	regional	roads	improvement	programme	that	will	see	significant	upgrades	in	
critical	 road	infrastructure	in	 the	major	agricultural	 regions	and	here	I	make	 special	mention	of	
the	Western	Region.		
Our	 trunk	 roads	 development	 programmes	 are	 also	 progressing	 steadily	 across	 the	 country.	
COCOBOD	 is	 funding	 the	 reshaping,	 spot	 improvements	 and	 upgrading	 of	 gravel	 roads	 to	
bituminous	surfaces	in	cocoa,	coffee	and	sheanut	producing	areas.	
In	the	course	of	this	year,	and	under	the	policy	on	public	private	partnerships,	feasibility	studies	
will	commence	on	the	dualization	of	the	Accra- Cape	Coast- Takoradi	road,	and	the	rehabilitation	
and	expansion	of	 the	Accra- Tema	motorway. New	interchanges	are	also	planned	 for	 the	Tema	
end	of	the	motorway	and	the	Kasoa-Bawjiase	intersection.	
Work	will	commence	this	year	too	on	a	new	interchange	at	the	Kwame	Nkrumah	Circle.	It	is	also	
my	hope	that	the	project	for	the	PPP	in	respect	of	the	multi-carriage	Accra-Kumasi	Highway	will	
be	approved	by	Parliament	for	work	to	commence	this	year.
RAILWAY	
14
Mr.	 Speaker, the	 Government’s	 plan	 to	 revamp	 and	 modernize	 the	 railway	 sector	 is	 ongoing.	
There	has	been	tremendous	work	in	this	sector	and	I	recall	my	meeting	with	the	railway	workers	
at	the	‘Bottom	Tree’	in	Sekondi.	I	can	confidently	say	to	them	today,	that	as	we	continue	with	our	
railway	sector	development	programme	there	will	be	significant	signs	of	improvement	within	the	
next	three	years.
Government	believes	 the	private	sector	has	a	 role	 to	play	in	 the	on-going	modernization	of	 the	
rail	 sector,	 an	 example	 being the	 rehabilitation	 of	 the	 Accra-Tema,	 Kumasi-Ejisu,	 the	 AccraNsawam
and	Takoradi-Kojokrom	rail	networks.	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 as	 they	 say	 in	Oseikrom,	 the	Kumasi airport	 is	 now	 busier	 than	 Kejetia	 lorrypark.	
That	 description	 is	 a	 reflection	 of	 the	 brisk	 business	 at	 our	 airports.	 Available	 data	 shows	 that	
passenger	traffic	through	our	International	Airport	has	more	than	quadrupled	in	the	last	3	years.	
Domestic	passenger	traffic	on	the	other	hand	has	increased	ten-fold.		
This	 remarkable	 progress	 is	 putting	 immense	 strain	 on	 our	 airport	 infrastructure,	 which	 we	
continue	 to	 expand.	 As	 a	 matter	 of	 priority	 Government	 has	 commissioned	 the	 immediate	
exploration	 of	 plans	 for	 the	 construction	 of	 a	 new	 international	 airport	 in	 Accra,	 and	
complementary	 expansion	 of	 the	 airports	 in	 Kumasi,	 Tamale,	 Sunyani	 and	 Takoradi. Feasibility	
studies	for	the	construction	of	Aerodromes	in	Ho,	Cape	Coast,	Koforidua,	Bolgatanga,	would	be	
undertaken	 this	 year. We	 will	 commence	 a	 feasibility	 study	 on	 the	 establishment	 of	 a	 new	
national	airline	in	collaboration	with	the	private	sector	under	a	PPP	arrangement.
Mr.	Speaker,	as	we	continue	to	expand	the	infrastructure	at	the	Tema	and	Takoradi	ports,	we	are	
also	 focused	 on	 the	 construction	 of	 a	 modern	 deep	 seaport	 in	 Takoradi.	 I	 have	 directed	 the	
Ministers of	 Transport	 and	 Finance	 to	 undertake	 an	 investigation	 of	 unauthorized	 fees and	
charges	at	our	airport	and	ports which	are	putting	which	are	putting unbearable	hardship	on	our	
importers.	
HOUSING	AND	URBAN	RENEWAL
Mr.	 Speaker, one	 of	 the	 areas	 that	 I	 am	 passionate	 about	 is	 the	 concept	 of	 urban	 renewal.	 I	
believe	that	one	of	the	most	basic	human	rights	we	must	guarantee	every	Ghanaian	is	the	right	to	
a	 safe,	 secure	 and	 accessible	 place	 of	 convenience.	 The	 pollution	 of	 our	 environment	 and	
especially	our	beachfronts	is	depressing.	
Government	will	in	 the	next	 three	years	work	with	all	stakeholders	 to	ensure	 that	 the	National	
Housing	Policy	document	is	not	only	finalized	and	approved	by	both	Cabinet	and	Parliament;	but	
also,	work	 feverishly	 to	ensure	 that	 relevant	legislation	is	put	in	place	 to	provide	 the	necessary	
foundation	as	well	as	legal	framework	for	implementation.
Government	 will	 this	 year	 initiate	 a	 pilot	 scheme	 to	 combine	 social	 housing	 with	 improved	
sanitation	and	water	supply.	 This	will	particularly	concentrate	on	 the	dense	urban	slums	where	
the	phenomenon	of	safe	sanitation	and	waste	disposal	are	very	weak.
We	will	be	working	to	consolidate	the	various	strategies	being	implemented	to	bridge	the	huge	
housing	 deficit.	 These	 strategies,	 which	 are	 in	 themselves	 opportunities	 for	 public-private	
partnership	 arrangements,	 will include	 the	 construction	 of	 low	 cost	 units	 for	 lower	 income	
groups,	 rural	 and	 social	 housing	 for	 the	 very	 poor	 and	 mortgage	 facilities	 for	 those	 who	 can	
afford.	
15
Mr.	Speaker,	I	am	deeply	concerned	about	how	the	challenges	in	the	housing	sector, have	led	to	
exorbitant	rents	that	do	not	only	violate	our	rent	law	but	also	suffocate	the	average	Ghanaian.	I	
will	work	hard	to	address	this	challenge.	
Mr.	Speaker,	water	supply	is	currently	precarious	in	some	communities	including	significant	parts	
of	 Accra.	 This	 is	 in	 spite	 of	 the	 several	 efforts	 we	 have	 been	making	 to	 improve	 the	 supply	 of	
good	drinking	water,	especially	to	Ghanaians.	
It	is	worth	noting	however	that	these	efforts	are	beginning	to	yield	some	results.		The	situation	
however	 requires	 massive	 investment	 in	 new	 water	 delivery	 infrastructure	 and	 timely	
maintenance	like	the	ongoing	works	at	the	Kpong headworks.	In	 the	medium	 to	long term,	we	
will	 seek	 to	 devolve	 authority	 from	 centralized	 urban	 water	 management	 systems	 to	 a	 more	
decentralized	management	for	efficiency and	cost	effective	delivery.
Mr.	Speaker, a	multi-agency	sanitation	task	 force	was	set-up	to	coordinate	a	nation-wide	cleanup
exercise	from	September	to	December	2012.		This	sanitation	management	effort	has	helped	to	
address	part	of	the waste	disposal	problem.		
The	 Task	 Force	 experience	 is	 now	 being	 reviewed	 in	 order	 to	 engage	 all	 the	 stakeholders,	
including	the	District	Assemblies,	in	a	more	sustained	and	concerted	effort	to	rid	our	country	of	
the	unsightly	rubbish	heaps	that	are	threatening	the	health	of	our	communities.
Mr.	Speaker,	my	focus	is	on	waste	and	sanitation	management	systems	not	just	waste	collection	
and	 disposal.	 The	 emphasis	 will	 also	 be	 on	 waste	 recovery	 and	 recycling	 as	 well	 as	 providing	
incentives	to	increase	private	sector	participation	in	the	hygiene,	sanitation	and	pollution	control	
sector.
The	start	of	the	CONTI	project	in	Accra	financed	by	the	US	EXIM	will	see	significant	improvement	
in	flood	control	and	solid	and	liquid	waste	management	in	the	capital	city.	
MINING	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 our	 mining	 sector	 needs	 substantial	 reform	 to	 ensure	 that	 we	 move	 towards	
economically	and	 socially	 sustainable	mining.	 The	Ministry	 of	Lands	and	Natural	 Resources	 has	
been	 tasked	 to	 ensure	 that	 mining	 in	 Ghana	 is	 undertaken	 responsibly	 and	 meets	 community	
needs	and	expectations.	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 mining	 must	 create	 employment	 that	 matches	 its	 type,	 provides	 fair	 economic	
returns	to	the	community	and	protects	the	environment.	
As	I	 recently	 announced,	 Government	 will	 rigidly	 enforce	 the	 laws	 of	 Ghana	 by	 addressing	 the	
illegal	 invasion	 of	 foreigners	 in	 our	 small-scale	 mining	 sector.	 This	 problem	 has	 been	 fully	
investigated	 and	 we	 have	 concluded	 that	 there	 is	 an unacceptable	 collusion	 between	 some	
Ghanaians	and	these	foreigners	to	circumvent our	laws.		
Mr.	Speaker, a	series	of	decisive	measures	are	underway	to	purge	the	system	and	better	regulate	
small-scale	mining,	in	order	to	create	and	sustain	employment,	for	Ghanaians,	primarily.
ENERGY	AND	PETROLEUM
Mr.	 Speaker, millions	 of	 Ghanaians	 and	 businesses	 are	 today	 experiencing	 very	 erratic	 and	
frustrating	 electricity	 supply.	It	 is	a	 situation	 that	I	am	 deeply	concerned	about,	and	 to	which	I	
have	 devoted	 considerable	 energy	 to	 solving.	 This	 is	 especially	 because	 compounding	 the	
16
problem	of	unstable	power	supply	is	an	equally	worrying	issue	of	unreliable	water	supply	to	some	
communities.	
The	current	developments	do	not	reflect	the	investments	and	progress	we	have	been	making	in	
the	 area	 of	 electricity	 generation.	What	 should	 be	 our	 successes	 and	 rather	 augment	 available	
generation	 capacity	 has	 unfortunately	 been	 undermined	 by	 a	 number	 of	 unforeseen	
developments.	
We	 had	 made	 good	 progress	 in	 fixing	 the	 damage	 done	 to	 the	 West	 African	 Gas	 Pipeline	
Company	 (WAPCO) only	 to	experience	a	drawback,	when	nearly	600	kilometres	of	 the	pipeline	
was	inundated	with	seawater.	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 in	 a	 frantic	 effort	 to	 pump	 the	 seawater	 out,	 two	 of	 our	 most	 experienced	
engineers	lost	their	lives	tragically	in	an	underwater	explosion.		Permit	me	to	use	this	occasion	to	
send	my	deepest	condolences	to	the	bereaved	families.	
The	 repercussions	 of	 the	 incapacitated	 gas	 pipeline	 has	 brought	 near	 total	 darkness	 to	 our	
neighbours	in	Togo	and	Benin,	and	led	to	the	loss	of	over 250	MW	of	electricity	supply	to	Ghana.	
Mr.	Speaker,	work	on	the	WAGPI is	now	planned	for	completion	in	April	2013.
As	 President	I	 am	 adequately	 aware	 of	 the challenges	 and	 the	 extreme	 discomfort	 that	 this	 is	
causing to	the	generality	of	our	people	and	businesses.	This	situation	causes	me	sleepless nights.	
We	have	had	to	work round	the	clock	to	bring	many	plants	into	operation	earlier	than	scheduled	
while	we	await	the	restoration	of	the	plants	affected	by	the	absence	of	gas	from	the	WAPCO.	
We	 are	 expecting	 the	 addition	 of	 over	 500	MW	 of	 installed	 generation	 capacity	 this	 year.	 This	
includes:	
132	MW	from	the	Takoradi 3	Thermal	Plant	by	end	of	February
130	MW	from	the	Bui	Hydroelectric	Power	Project	by	end	of	April	and	increased	to	400MW	by	
end	of	September	
2	MW	from	a	Solar	Park	at	Navrongo	by	end of	February
With	 the	 addition	 of	 Takoradi	 3	 this	 month,	 and	 the	 first	 power	 from	 Bui	 in	 April,	 our	 current	
deficit	 of	 about	 200	 MW	 at	 peak,	 should	 be	 sufficiently	 ameliorated.	 While	 this	 will	 give	 us	
comfort	 from	 the	 current	 unpleasant	 load	 shedding,	 the system	 will	 still	 be	 fragile	 with	 a	 slim	
margin	of	redundancy.	Restoration	of	the	WAGPI	and	Asogli	coming	back	on	stream	will	give	us	a	
better	margin	of	comfort.
Work	 has	 also	 started	 on	 a	 161	 kV	 Tumu-Han-Wa	transmission	 line	 in	 the	 Upper	 West	 Region.	
Other	projects	are	the	Kpando-Kadjebi	Transmission	Project,	a	new	330KV	transmission	line	from	
Aboadze–Prestea-Kumasi- Tamale- Bolgatanga	among	others.
Mr.	 Speaker, Government’s overall	 objective	 for	 the energy	 sector	 is	 to	 ensure	 reliable,	 stable	
and	 progressively	 cheap	 power	 for	 economic	 development	 in	 the	 country	 and	 the	 wider	West	
African	region.	
Ultimately	 developing	and	 bringing	 on	 stream	 our	 own	 gas	 potential	will	 guarantee	affordable	
power	 to	 support	 the	 acceleration	 in	 growth	 of	 our	 economy.	 Gas	 from	 our	 Western	 field
provides	us	with	enough	flexibilities	and	cost-efficient	ways	of	additional	power	generation. This	
project	will	receive	my	personal	attention. Work	is	progressing	steadily	on	the	Gas	Infrastructure	
17
Project	at	Atuabo	in	the	Elemebelle	district	of	the	Western	Region.	When	completed by	the	end	
of	 this	 year,	 it	will	put	 us	 on	 track	to	 achieve	 the	 planned	 expansion	 of	 5,000	MW	 capacity	 of	
power	generation	by	2016.		
Government	 will	 continue	 during	 the	 year,	 to	 support	 the	 utility	 companies	 to	 carry	 out	
distribution	 system	 improvement	 projects	 and	 increase	 electricity	 access	 to	 all	 parts	 of	 the	
country	under	the	‘Energy	for	All’	programme	to	ensure	universal	access	by	2016.	
Mr.	 Speaker,	 we	 are	 progressing	 steadily	 in	 the	 area	 of	 renewable	 energy,	 by	 installing	 Solar	
systems	 for	 remote	 Public	 Institutions	 and	 Community	 Lighting	 in	 off-grid	 communities.	 In	
addition,	 Government	 will	 implement	 pilot	 mini-grid	 electrification	 for	 lakeside	 and	 island	
communities.
The	private	sector	has	shown	considerable	interest	in	investing	in	the	renewable	energy	sector.	
Government	will	ensure	that	the	feed-in-tariff	is	published	to	encourage	these	private	investors				
Mr.	 Speaker, we	 will	 commence	 the	 distribution	 of	 over	 twenty	 thousand	 solar	 lanterns	 to	
replace	 kerosene	 lanterns	 and	 reduce	 indoor	 air	 pollution	 in	 remote	 rural	 homes.	 This	
intervention	forms	part	of	government’s	efforts	 to	protect	 the	vulnerable	in	our	society	and	 to	
ensure	that	they	have	alternative	and	affordable	sources	of	energy.	
Mr.	Speaker,	the	GNPC	through	joint	ventures	continue	to	explore	the	hydrocarbon	potential	of	
our	sedimentary	basins.		
As	 part	 of	 measures	 to	 promote	 local	 content	 and	 participation	 in	 the	 petroleum	 industry,	 an	
Enterprise	 Development	 Centre	 (EDC)	 with	 support	 from	 the	 Jubilee	 Partners	 will	 be	 fully	
operational	this	year.	
The	centre	will	be	located	in	the	Western	Region	to	 facilitate	the	training	of	Small	and	Medium	
Enterprises	(SMEs)	to	be	properly positioned	to	take	advantage	of the	oil	and	gas	industry.
We will	proceed	with	local	content	legislation	to	ensure	Ghanaian	participation	in	this	blessing	of	
nature	God	has	bestowed	on	us.	We	will	implement	local	content	in	a	manner	that	is	a	win-win	
for	Ghana	and	our	foreign	partners	in	Ghana’s	growing	oil	and	gas industry.
Mr.	Speaker,	this	year	we	will	start	a	restructuring	of	TOR	to	restore	it	to	its	former	glory	as	the	
most	efficient	refinery	on	the	west	coast	of	Africa.	We	will	carry	this	out	with	strategic	partners	
who	are	willing	to	invest	in	a	PPP	with	the Government	of	Ghana.
The	Bulk	Oil	Storage	Company	(BOST)	will	be	reorganized	to	play	its	role	in	strategic	storage	and	
distribution	of	petroleum	products.		
Mr.	 Speaker,	 security	 for	 oil	 and	 gas	 continues	 to	 be	 a	 major	 priority.	 The	 Navy,	 Airforce	 and	
Army	have	been	retooled	to	establish	a	safe	and	secure	corridor	for	our	oil	and	gas installations.		
We	 will	 continue	 to	 provide	 security	 for	 both	 onshore	 and	 offshore	 oil	 and	 gas	 infrastructure	
against	 disruptive	 threats	 and	 theft	 while	 putting	 in	 place	 anti-piracy infrastructure. The	
completion	of	the	Vessel	Tracking	and	Monitoring	System	being	installed	by	the	Ghana	Maritime	
Authority	 will	 allow	 us	 to	 use	 radar	 to	 identify	 unauthorized	 vessels	 that	 enter	 our	 territorial	
waters.
18
We	will	place	emphasis	on	integrating	community	groups	into	protection	arrangements	thereby	
supporting	employment	growth	even	as	we	undertake	a	comprehensive	assessment	of	 risks	 to	
our	maritime	assets	including	downstream	and	onshore	facilities	such	as	pipelines.	
PILLAR	FOUR:	TRANSPARENT AND ACCOUNTABLE GOVERNANCE
Mr.	 Speaker,	 Ghana	 continues	 to	 exhibit	 strong	 leadership	 in	 democratic	 governance,	 which	
makes	 us	 the	 envy	 of	 many	 nations.	 As	 noted	 earlier,	 we	 have	 just	 come	 out	 of	 an	 historic	
election	which	witnessed	progressive	reforms	including	the	use	of	a	biometric	voters	register	and	
biometric	 verification	 for	 voting	which	 has	 been	 acclaimed	 by	 both	 domestic	 and	 international	
observers	as	free,	fair	and	transparent.		
Government	will	continue	 to	support	 the	Electoral	Commission	by	providing	it	with	 the	needed	
resources	to	carry	out	its	programmes	and	reforms.	
The	independence	of	the	judiciary	would	be	upheld	and	we	would	work	to	improve	conditions	of	
work	of	the	judiciary.		We	will	work	with	the	Judicial	Council	to	continue	the process	of	providing	
new	and	more	modern	court	rooms	and	provide	the	instruments	and	equipment	to	facilitate	the	
work	of	the	judges.
Mr.	Speaker, Government	will	continue	to	partner	with	community-based	organisations	and	civil	
society	especially	in	the	areas	of	public	service	reform	and	delivery.	
In	 pursuing	 this	 objective,	 the	 Government	 of	 Ghana	 will	 develop	 mechanisms	 for	 promoting	
citizen-based	 monitoring	 and	 evaluation	 of	 public	 policies	 and	 programs,	 as	 well	 as	 providing	
feedback	 and	 suggestions	 on	 ways	 of	 improving	 the	 targeting	 of	 social	 and	 economic	
development	programmes. Civil	society	will	continue	to	have	limitless	space	to	participate	in	our	
governance	system.	It	is	healthy	and	allows	growth	of	democratic	governance.
Mr.	 Speaker,	 We	 will	 guarantee	 freedom	 of	 worship	 as	 enshrined	 in	 our	 constitution	 and	
continue	to	promote	peaceful	coexistence	of	all	religions	in	our	country.	It	is	expected	that	the	
umbrella	 religious	 organizations	 will	 in	 turn	 implement	 self-regulation	 to	 curb	 the	 excesses	 of	
some	of	their	members	who	give	the	clergy	a	bad	name.	
Mr.	 Speaker,	the	 role	 of	 traditional	 institutions,	 will	 be	 strengthened	 to	 promote	 accountable	
governance.	 	 Working	 with	 the	 National	 House	 of	 Chiefs,	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Chieftaincy	 and	
Traditional	 Affairs	 has	 been	re-aligned	to	 provide	more	 vigorous	 interface	 between	 chieftaincy	
and	 tradition. We	 will	 progressively	 improve	 the	 allowances	 given	 to	 Paramount	 chiefs	 and	
Queenmothers	to	facilitate	the	execution	of	their	traditional	duties.
Mr. Speaker, a	 strong	 parliament	 is	 a	 strong	 democracy.	 Strengthening	 Parliament	 is	 also a	
crucial	 element	 in	 managing	 a	 successful	 transition	 to	 middle-income	 status.	 	 This	 includes	
ensuring	that	Parliament	has	the	capacity	to	play	its	oversight	role	effectively.		
Mr. Speaker,	the	‘Job	 600’ project, which	will	 ensure	 that	Members	 of	 Parliament	 can	 operate	
from	descent	offices, is	almost	complete. MPs	can	expect	to	be	furnished	with	laptops	with	full	
19
Internet	 connectivity	 to	 facilitate	 communication	 between	 their	 offices	 and	 constituents as	
promised	in	the	NDC	manifesto.	
In	my	first	term,	we	will	seek	to	strengthen	Parliament	by:
- Establishing	 the	 Democracy	 Fund	 proposed	 by	 the	 Constitution	 Review	 Commission	
(CRC)	 to	 provide	 sustainable	 funding	 for	 Parliament,	 Independent	 Governance	
Institutions	and	other	pro-democracy	governance	bodies.
- Strengthening	 the	 Committees	 of	 Parliament	 by	 ensuring	 that	 the	 Chairpersons	 and	
Ranking	 Members	 of	 Parliament	 are	 accorded	 recognition	 consistent	 with	 their	 status	
and	responsibilities	as	recommended	by	the	CRC.
- Commence	a	feasibility	study	for	the	construction	of	a	new	Parliamentary	Chamber	block	
on	the	premises	of	the	state	house.
- We	will	also	 explore	appropriate	 housing	 for	MPs	 in	order	 to	 gurantee	 their	 safety	and	
security.
DECENTRALIZATION	AND	LOCAL	GOVERNANCE
Mr.	 Speaker,	 effective	 decentralization	 in	 governance	 and	 decision-making	 starts	 with	 the	
Presidency.	I	have	therefore	instructed	the	Cabinet	office	to	ensure	that	Cabinet	meetings	rotate	
between	Accra	and	the	Regional	capitals.		By	this,	millions	of	our	citizens	outside	Accra	will	have	
the	opportunity	each	month	to	witness	and	participate	in	the	process	of	decision-making	directly.
Mr.	Speaker, during	my	first	term	as	President,	every effort	will	be	made	to	ensure	that	some	of
the	 far-reaching	 proposals	 emanating	 from	 the	 CRC’s	 report	 on	 decentralization	 such	 as	 the	
election	of	Chief	 Executives	at	 the	local	level	is	given	 the	needed	impetus. We	will	mainstream	
the	 concept	 of	 Local	 Economic	 Development	 (LED)	 to	 facilitate,	 develop	 and	 implement	
employment	 creation	 programmes	 based	 on	 the	 natural	 resource	 endowments	 and	 the	
comparative	advantages	of	every	district.
We	will	continue	to	strengthen	our	decentralized	local	governance	system	by	implementing	the	
programme	 to	 establish	 the	 remaining	 seven	 decentralized	 Departments	 of	 the	 District	
Assemblies	and	 identifying	 new	Departments	 for	decentralization	whose	capacities	are	 needed	
by	the	District	Assemblies	such	as	the	Departments	of	Women	and	of	Children	and	the	Statistical	
Service.
We	will	also	commence	a	phased	programme	for	the	provision	of	administrative,	economic	and	
social	 infrastructure	 for	 the	 106	 new	 districts	 created	 in	 2003,	 2007	 and	 2012	 and	 extend	 the	
composite	budget	system	to	cover	the	46	new	District	Assemblies	established	in	2012.
THE	MEDIA
Mr.	 Speaker, the	 Broadcasting	 Bill	 has	 been	 on	 the	 drawing	 board	 for	 a	 long	 time.	 We	 must	
hasten	to	pass	the	Bill	so	that	national	standards	for	the	electronic	media	can	be	established.	
The	newly	 established	Media	Development	Fund	aimed	at	improving	capacity	within	 the	media	
will	be	operationalized	this	year.
20
We	shall	also	support	the	National	Media	Commission	to	enact	the	needed	Regulations	that	will	
establish	 an	 organizational	 framework	 and	 standards	 to	 ensure	 balance,	 fairness,	 access,	
opportunity	and	objectivity	in	the	media.	
Access	 to	 the	 establishment	 of	 Community	 radio	 will	 be	 improved	 to	 allow	 millions	 more	 to	
benefit	from	the	unique	attributes	of	this	medium.
CONSTITUTIONAL	AMENDMENTS,	JUSTICE	AND	THE	RULE	OF	LAW
Mr.	 Speaker, a major	 governance	 issue	 for	 the	 year	 will	 be	 the	 implementation	 of	 the	
recommendations	 of	 the	 Constitutional	 Review	 Commission.	 For	 this	 purpose,	 an	
Implementation	 Committee	 has	 been	 established	 to	 be	 responsible	 for	 all	 aspects	 of	 the	
programme	 leading	 to	 the	 enactment	 of	 constitutional	 amendments.	 Subsequent	 to	 the	
constitutional	amendments,	which	the	CRC	Implementation	Committee is	currently	working	on,	
we	 will	 proceed	 to	 transform	 the	 Legal	 Aid	 Board	 into	 an	 independent	 constitutional	 body,	
implement	 the	 recommendation	 for	 CHRAJ’s	 decisions	 to	 be	 made	 directly	 enforceable,	 and	
introduce	the	recommended	weekend	and	small	claims	courts.
COMBATING	CORRUPTION
Mr.	 Speaker, we	 are	 proposing	 to	 revise	 the	 Criminal	 Offences	 Act	 to	 redefine	 corruption	 to	
include	the	more	expansive	definition	covered	in	the	UN	Convention	Against	Corruption	and	the	
AU	 Convention	 on	 Preventing	 and	 Combating	 Corruption. We	 will	 give	 impetus	 to	 the	 fight	
against	 corruption	 by	 strengthening	 the	 anti-corruption	 agencies and	 sanctioning	 culpable	
persons	 to	 serve	as	a	 deterrent	 to	 others.	 The	work	 of	 the	 Sole	 Commissioner	 into	 judgement	
debts	will	help	us	bring	to	order	an	unacceptable	phenomenon	that	has	become	a	huge	charge	
on	the	public	debt.	We	would	push	for	critical	reforms	in	the	AGs	department.		I will implement	
the	Freedom	of	Information	Act	as	soon	as	it	is	passed	by	Parliament.
Our	commitment	to	the	fight	against	corruption	remains	unshakeable.	We	would	streamline	and	
root	out	the	rot	that	has	become	associated	with	the	alienation	of	public	lands.
FIGHTING	NARCOTICS	TRAFFICKING	AND	CONSUMPTION
Mr.	Speaker, I	am	firmly	committed	in	ensuring	that	Ghana	is	absolutely	insulated	from	the	illicit	
drug	trade.	
To	this	end;	we	will	pursue	the	programme	for	the	legislative	conversion	of	the	Narcotics	Control	
Board	(NACOB)	into	an	autonomous	Commission.
We	will	also	continue	to	strengthen	the	inter-agency	coordination	mechanism	involving	NACOB,	
the	Customs	Division	of	the	Ghana	Revenue	Authority,	the	Police,	BNI,	the	Food	and	Drugs	Board,	
Aviation	 Security	 and	 the	 Immigration	 Service	 and	 ensure	 increased	 international	 cooperation	
especially	for	surveillance.
We	 shall	 maintain	 a	 zero	 tolerance	 for	 drug	 trafficking	 and	 I	 request	 all	 officials	 engaged	 in	
tackling	this	menace	to	maintain	a	high	sense	of	integrity	in	order	to	win	this	battle.
NATIONAL	SECURITY
Mr.	 Speaker, the	 security	 and	 safety	 of	 all	 citizens	 will	 be	 a	 priority.	 	 We	 have	 been	 making	
modest	 gains	 as	 crime	 statistics	 show	 that	 the	 incidence of	 crime	 is	 on	 the	 decline.	 	 This	
notwithstanding,	 we	 will	 continue	 to	 resource	 and	 adequately	 equip	 the	 security	 services	 to	
ensure	that	no	Ghanaian	feels	unsafe	in	their	lawful	pursuits.
21
A	worrying	 trend	in	our	crime	indices	is	increasing	cases	of	 rape	and	defilement.	In	many	cases	
families,	religious	leaders,	traditional	rulers	and	sometimes	public	officials	intervene	to	cover	up	
and	resolve	these	cases	at	home.	I	wish	to	emphasise	that	rape	and	defilement	are	criminal	and	
must	be	handled	by	the	criminal	justice	system.		We	must	bring	to	book	paedophiles	and	rapist	
who	prey	on	our	women	and	rob	them	of	their	dignity.	I	am	instructing	the	IGP,	DOVVSU,	GCSP	to	
work	together	to	ensure	that	all	of	such	cases	are	brought	to	justice.
Mr.	 Speaker,	 we	 will	 continue	 to	 provide	 critical	 support	 capable	 of	 augmenting	 the	
developmental	 service	 mix	 of	 our	 armed	 forces	 while	 providing	 adequate	 security	 for	 our	
citizens.		This	strategy	involves:
1. Enhancing	 the	 health	 and	 logistical	 infrastructure	 that	 enables	 the	 security	 agencies	 to	
lead	 rescue	 and	 support	 missions,	 step	 in	 when	 we	 have	 major	 disruptions	 in	 basic	
services	 – water,	 health,	 sanitation,	 floods	and	 natural	 disasters	and	also	 perform	 their	
traditional	 world-acclaimed	 peacekeeping	 and	 development	 role	 in	 post-conflict	
situations.
2. Undertake	 a	 comprehensive	 Security	 Services	 Health	 Sector	 Initiative	 that	 will	 improve	
basic,	 primary	 and	 referral	 health	 facilities	 within	 the	 security	 services	 and	 also	 make	
those	facilities	available	for	use	by	the	general	public. In	this	regard	we	will	build	a	second	
military	hospital	in	Kumasi	and	upgrade	the	medical	stations	in	the	various	barracks.
3. Address	 the	 critical	 office	 and	 residential	 accommodation	 problems	 facing	 the	 military	
and	the	Police,	Prisons,	Fire	and	Immigration	Services	as	well	as	NADMO.
Mr.	 Speaker,	 in	 collaboration	 with	 the	 National	 Peace	 Council,	 the	 UNDP,	 The	 Otumfuor	
Committee	and	other	stakeholders,	I	intend	to	begin	a	new	round	of	bringing	to	closure	some	of	
the	protracted	chieftaincy	conflicts	in	the	north.	I	call	for	the	cooperation	of	all	my	compatriots	in	
these	areas	to	give	peace	a	chance.	We	can	only	succeed	in	turning	around	the	fortunes	of	the	3	
Northern	regions	if	we	have	an	atmosphere	of	peace	and	security.
FOREIGN	POLICY
Mr.	Speaker, Ghana’s	foreign	policy	of	positive	neutrality	will	remain	our	focus	with	emphasis	on	
economic	 diplomacy	 hinged	 on	 our	 national	 interest.	 Ultimately,	 our	 foreign	 policy	 will	 deliver	
good	 neighbourliness,	 peace	 at	 home	 and	 abroad	 and	 economic	 wellbeing	 by	 strategic	
partnerships.
Mr.	Speaker,	our	commitment	to	peace	and	security	in	the	West	African	Region	is	paramount	in	
our	foreign	policy	considerations.		We	have	recently	joined	with	ECOWAS	in	seeking	a	permanent	
peaceful	 resolution	 of	 the	 conflict	 in	Mali,	 by	 contributing	a	modest	 detachment	 of	 our	armed	
forces	to	participate	in	the	African-led	force	operating	in	Mali,	AFISMA.		
As	the	actual	armed	conflict	is	abating,	Ghana	stands	ready	to	use	our	rich	mediation	experience,	
to	 assist	Mali	 return	 to	 stable,	 representative	 democracy,	 just	as	we	 have	 done	 in	 time	 past	 in	
helping	bring	peace	to	Liberia,	Sierra	Leone	and	Cote	d’Ivoire.	
As	a	commitment	to	peace	and	stability	in	the	region,	I	have	pledged	at	the	Africa	Union	and	the	
United	Nations,	that	Ghana	will	not	serve	as	a	haven	to	destabilize	any	of	our	neighbors.	I	wish	
once	again	to	assure	any	refugees	on	our	territory	that	they	are	welcome	guests	as	long	as	they	
do	not	use	Ghana	as	a	base	to	destabilize	the	Governments	in	their	home	countries.
22
Under	 my	 Presidency,	 Ghanaians and	 the	 international	 community	 can	 trust	 that	 Ghana	 will	
uphold	 all	 its	 commitments	 to	 the	 UN,	 the	 AU,	 the	 Commonwealth,	 ECOWAS	 and	 other	
international	organisations	to	which	we	belong.
Ghana	 will	 continue	 to	 take	 all	 necessary	 measures,	 in	 cooperation	with	 relevant	 international	
agencies,	 to	 fight	 against	 international	 terrorism,	 money	 laundering,	 narcotics and	 human	
trafficking.			
Mr.	 Speaker,	 the	 financial	 framework	 within	 which	 the	 programs	 and	 policies	 discusses	 in	 this	
address	 will	 be	 executed	 will	 be	 outlined	 when	 the	 Minister	 of	 Finance	 in	 the	 coming	 weeks,	
presents	the	Budget	and	Financial	Statement	of	Government	to	this	house.
CONCLUSION
Mr. Speaker, fifty	years	ago	our	nation’s	founder	and	the	first	President	of	the	Republic	Osagyefo	
Dr.	 Kwame	Nkrumah	 urged	Ghanaians	 to	 remember	 that	 the	 eyes	 of	 the	world	are	 upon	 us	 in	
whatever	we	do.	These	profound	words	have	as	much	meaning	today	as	they	were	five	decades	
ago.	It	is	a	challenge	to	us	to	work	together	to	bring	honour	to	our	country	and	its people.	
I	 reaffirm	 my	 commitment	 to	 uniting	 Ghanaians	 as	 one	 people.	 We	 are	 a	 nation	 of	 diverse	
cultures	and	religious	beliefs;	there	is	a	tremendous	amount	of	beauty	in	our	diversity.	While	we	
celebrate	our	diversity,	let	us	explore	what	unites	us	instead	of	focusing on	the	things	that	divide	
us.	
Let	us	build	trust	-- remembering	always	that	civility,	humility	and	discipline	are	signs	of	a	strong	
national	 character.	 Real	 change	 is	when	 everyone	 pulls	 together,	works	 together,	when	we	all	
exercise	our	responsibilities	to	country,	our	local	communities	and	our	families.
Let	me	state	to	this	august	House	
1. That	 I	 shall	 work	 to	 ensure	 that	 every	 household	 in	 this	 country	 will	 soon	 enjoy	
uninterrupted	water	and	power	supply;	
2. That	our	young	minds	desirous	of	opportunities	for	basic	and	secondary	education	shall	
have	 the	 space	 in	 our	 schools	 and	 shall	 have	 quality,	 affordable education	 that	 will	
improve	their	career	and	life	expectations;	
3. That	our	mothers	shall	live	longer	and	healthier	as	they	perform	the	God-given	 function	
of	child-birth;	
4. That	our	inner	cities	shall	witness	significant	renewal	in	sanitation	and	housing
5. That	 the	 economic	 opportunities	 of	 this	 country	 will	 be	 open	 to	 all	 our	 citizens	
irrespective	of	gender,	ethnicity,	religion	or	political	affiliation.
6. That	our	governance	systems	shall	deliver	the	services	and	opportunities	we	promise	to	
the	citizens	of	Ghana;	and
7. That	our	citizens	will	assume	their	right	to	demand	accountability	for	these	services	and	
rights	and	that	our	roads	infrastructure	is not	only	expanded	but	also	made	safer	for	our	
people.
Mr. Speaker,	we	are	determined	to	deliver	on	the	development	goals,	which	I	have	outlined.	We	
have	objectives	 to	meet	and	 the	expectations	of	our	people	 to	 fulfill;	our	people	expect	 to	see	
results,	 whether	 it	 is	 in	 the	 delivery	 of	 water,	 electricity,	 healthcare	 or	 sanitation	 services.	We	
23
must	not	overlook	 the	little	 things	 that	matter	 to	our	people	 even	as	we	 stress	on	 responsible	
citizenship	as	an	important	factor	in	nation-building.
Political	 office holders	 including	 Ministers	 of	 State,	 Metropolitan,	 Municipal	 and	 District	 Chief	
Executives,	 CEOs	 of	 public	 institutions	 and	 middle	 and	 lower	 management	 personnel	 will	 be	
required	 to	 exhibit	a	 high	 sense	 of	 responsibility	and	 diligently	 execute	 their	mandate	 to	meet	
the	needs	of	the	ordinary	Ghanaian.	It	must	not	be	business-as-usual.
		
Mr.	Speaker, we	may	be	confronted	with	many	challenges	as	a	nation	but	our	collective	resolve	is	
far	greater	than	those	challenges.
Mr.	 Speaker,	 as	 I	 said	 on	 that	 eventful	 day	 of	 my	 inauguration,	 “change	 does	 not	 happen	
overnight	and	sometimes,	despite	whatever	progress	has	been	placed	in	motion,	it	will	appear	to	
be	darkest	before	the	dawn	of	the	new	day	makes	that	progress	visible.		In	such	times	I	will	be	
counting	on	you	to	maintain	the	faith	and	the	trust	that	you	have	placed	in	me	as	President.		I	will	
not	let	you	down.”
Our	 momentary	 difficulties	 must	 only	 serve	 in	 strengthening	 this	 collective	 resolve	 towards	 a	
future	of	limitless	possibilities.
Despair	is	not	an option	and	we	shall	not	make	excuses.
I	know	I	lead a	nation	of	great	people	who	have	it	within	us	to	establish	that	fair	and	just	society	
of	opportunities	for	all	to	which	I	dedicate	my	entire	efforts.
Mr. Speaker,	the	future	is	here;	the	future	is	ours;	the	youth,	women	and	men,	and	especially	the	
children	of	our	motherland,	Ghana,	expect	noticeable	improvement	in	their	lives.
In	 all	 this	we	 acknowledge	 our	 abundant	 faith	 in	 God	 and	 his	 bountiful	mercies	 on	 our	 nation.	
God’s	divine	favour	is	on	Ghana. We	have	no	cause	to	fear.	With	God	in	our	boat	we	smile	at	the	
storm.
I	know	we	will	not	fail	our	country	and	I	know	the	Good	Lord	will	not	fail	us	either.	
God	bless	Ghana.
Thank	you.