
state of
the nation
address
At the Third Session of the Sixth Parliament
of the 4th Republic on Thursday February 26, 2015.
Presented by
H.E. JOHN DRAMANI MAHAMA,
President of the Republic of Ghana &
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces

1
Rt. Hon. Speaker
Your Excellency, the Vice President
Your Ladyship, the Chief Justice
Honourable Members of Parliament
I feel honoured to stand once again before this August house, pursuant to Article 67 of the
Constitution of the Republic of Ghana, to present to you a message on the State of the
Nation.
Mr. Speaker,
As I enter the 3rd year of my first term in office, I give praise to the Almighty God for
continuing to preserve and pour his bountiful favour on our nation. I also express my endless
thanks to the people of Ghana for giving me the opportunity to serve. This is a sacred
honour and trust that I swore in my oath as President, to always uphold.
Next week will mark our country’s 58th anniversary as an independent nation. The story of our
nation, since its proclamation at the stroke of midnight 6th March 1957, by our nation’s
founder, Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, is a story of resilience. That night, the euphoria in
the air was palpable. And as Dr. Nkrumah uttered those famous words, “At long last the
battle is ended, and thus our beloved country Ghana, is free forever”, our fathers and
mothers faced the future with joy and excitement.
Some of us were not born yet but we are able to capture the mood of the moment both
through the narrations given us by our elders and in the history books we have studied
growing up. As Nkrumah said, “seek ye first the political kingdom, and all other things shall
be added unto thee”. All other things meant prosperity, a quality life, happiness and even
wealth.
Fifty-eight long years later, we know that the reality of life is one of challenges. We have
been in the pits together, at times in the past when our neighbours described us as the
nation where people queued for toilet paper. In the early 80s hunger stalked our land and we
were compelled to take raw kenkey home to cook ourselves because we were afraid we
would lose out if we allowed the seller to cook it.
We have also celebrated many victories together.
The story of Ghana is illustrated by a quote of the great African, Nelson Mandela. He said,
“the greatest glory of living lies not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.”
We have gone through many challenges as a nation, but our defining spirit as Ghanaians is
that we have picked ourselves up each time we have fallen and continued to walk on. In our
journey towards creating a prosperous and dignified life for our people, we may find
ourselves sometimes in the wilderness. We may not agree on the destination. There are
many who would complain of the hardships on this journey.
There are even others who would suggest that life in bondage was far better. But as long as
we believe, work together and hold on to our faith, we would create the country of prosperity
that our people deserve. Nobody ever said it would be easy! And as has been said, we climb 

2
the greatest hill only to realize that there are many more hills to climb. Even the centuries
old, most advanced nations continue to climb their own hills. Challenges would come our
way, but believing in ourselves and working together, we shall overcome them.
We have climbed many hills together and we shall conquer many more in our journey of
progress.
Mr. Speaker,
As I present this State of the Nation Address, our nation is confronted with one of such hill;
the challenge of providing adequate electricity to power industry, business and for
residential consumption. The effects and frustrations posed by the power deficit are clearly
felt in our work places, our homes, schools and hospitals. The storage of food, academic
activity, and artisans such as barbers, hairdressers, welders, and health care providers are all
feeling the pinch of the power shortage.
Big businesses and industries are also suffering and threatening to lay off workers. As leader
of this nation by the grace of God, I more than anyone else understand the adverse impact
of this energy shortfall on the growth of our economy.
We have been here before. In 1983, 1998 and 2006/7 we suffered a similar occurrence. In the
past what we have done has been to manage the situation. I do not intend to manage the
situation as has been done in the past. I intend to fix it! I owe it to the Ghanaian people. I,
John Dramani Mahama, will fix this energy challenge.
Perhaps the impact of the energy shortage is felt much greater today not only because of the
growth of our economy, but also because many more people have access to electricity than
in the past. Access to electricity in Ghana is 76% and ranked 2nd only to South Africa in subSaharan
Africa.
Furthermore changes in the architectural design of many homes and offices, has resulted in a
situation which requires the use of more air-conditioning to maintain a bearable temperature
through most times of the year. Our rapidly growing population is also driving increasing
demand for power supply. All these together with other structural and generational issues
have contributed to an electricity supply gap that has oscillated between 300 and 600 MW.
The lessons we must learn from all this is to plan better for the future.
Firstly, our demand for power is estimated to be growing in excess of 10% per annum. It
means that conservatively, we would have to double our electricity supply capacity every 8
years if we are to keep up with demand.
Following power purchase agreements entered into with several Independent Power
Producers (IPPs) and plants that VRA is currently working on, we expect, starting from this
year and over the next 5 years to inject 3,665 MW of power into our power transmission grid.
The breakdown is as follows:
Sunon Asogli (Phase II) - 360MW
Sunon Asogli (Coal fired) - 750MW
CenPower - 350MW

3
Jacobsen - 360MW
Amandi - 240MW
GE - 1000MW
VRA (T4) - 185MW
VRA (KTPP) - 220MW
Additionally, completion of planned steam generation units on some current single cycle
plants, namely TT1, CENIT and KTPP would add another 330 MW to our generation. When
this planned addition of 3,800 MW to our generation is realized, it will assure our energy
security into the future.
Secondly, since 1965, we have relied principally on Hydro sources for our power supply. Our
base load generation must now be shifted from hydro to thermal. Hydropower must become
supplementary. In the last 2 years, because of low rainfall in the catchment area of the Volta,
the level of the Akosombo reservoir has fallen to a critical level.
Challenges with thermal generation, has also meant that we have had to run our hydro plants
at nearly full capacity thereby drawing down more water from the lake. The result is that
today, Akosombo with installed capacity of 1,020 MW is currently supplying only at about
50%. The Kpong hydro power station has installed capacity of 160 MW and is currently
operating at about 70%. The 400 MW Bui hydro plant is at about 58% during our peak
consumption period.
Thirdly, if we are to achieve energy security into the future, we must complete the reform of
our power sector. The new Ministry of power is working urgently on proposals to restructure
the power sector beginning with the Volta River Authority (VRA) and the Bui Power Authority
(BPA). The intention would be to bring the management of our hydro plants under one
entity.
This will lead to a consolidation of our thermal resources in partnership with pension fund
managers like SSNIT and other institutional investors. I believe this will allow for focus and
specialization in these 2 critical power sectors of hydro and thermal. If our plans for energy
security are to succeed, radical restructuring of the downstream distribution sector must
occur.
Under the new Millennium Challenge Compact we have an opportunity to review, restructure
and totally refocus the operations of, especially, the ECG. I can guarantee to Ghanaians that
we will transform the ECG into what we will all come to call a truly customer-responsive,
efficient and profitable organization. Admittedly, part of ECG’s problems is the creation of
Government institutions that believe that they are entitled to use power without paying for it.
That was possible in the days of cheap power from Akosombo. Today, with the entry of the
private sector and IPPs into the upstream generating sector, government cannot continue to
subsidize power.
In November last year, I carved out a new Ministry of Power from the former Ministry of
Energy and Petroleum. This was meant to give a sharper focus and effort to the resolution of
the present energy shortfall. As an immediate measure to resolve the current crisis, I have 

4
authorized the Ministry of Power to procure and feed into the system, 1,000MW of
emergency power. Guarantees are currently being agreed for the following:
Karpower ship (Turkey) 450MW
APR (UAE) 250MW
GE 300MW
The Ministry of Power estimates that this emergency power can be rolled out in months to
bring relief to the system while the more permanent plants mentioned previously are being
worked on. I would hold the Minister to his publicly stated commitment to resolve the
electricity supply deficit by the end of this year.
Mr. Speaker,
The prospects of gas fired thermal generation look very bright. The Ghana Gas Plant at
Atuabo is going through its commissioning phase and is currently supplying about 60 mscf of
gas to the Aboadze enclave of thermal plants. As VRA and partners put their thermal plants
in Aboadze in a better shape to take up more of the gas, the Atuabo Gas Plant would rump
up production to 120 mscf. We are also retrieving large quantities of LPG and other valuable
liquids as by-products of gas production.
Gas supplies are expected to rise in 2016 when production begins in the TEN field. Just
3weeks ago I witnessed the sign of an agreement to begin work on the ENI/Vitol Sankofa
field into operation. This investment is worth $7 billion and is reportedly the single biggest
investment signed in recent history. The operationalization of TEN and Sankofa will bring
Ghana’s gas production to above 300 mscf daily.

Mr. Speaker,
As part of our commitment to fully incorporate renewable energy into our supply mix, a
number of solar, wind, tidal wave and biomass projects are being pursued. The African
Plantations Limited project under which thousands of hectares of eucalyptus trees are being
planted as fuel would eventually generate one hundred and twenty megawatts of power. It
will also provide employment opportunities for our farmers and technician.
We would be rolling out this year, new initiatives on solar energy. A prepaid solar meter
scheme that would enable residents of remote off-grid communities own and enjoy solar
lighting would be launched as a private sector activity facilitated by government. We are also
working on a proposal that would make solar power available for micro enterprises operated
by barbers, hairdressers, dressmakers and other such micro entrepreneurs whose businesses
have been hit by the present power challenges.
The solution will also be available for residential consumers. We estimate that 200,000
rooftop solar systems will save the country about 200MW of power daily. It is proposed to
fund this with an adjustment of the Energy Fund Levy on Petroleum Products from Gp0.05 to
Gp1.0, part of which will be used to establish the Renewable Energy Fund. We also propose
to introduce an ancillary service charge of Gp1.0 per kWh of electricity transmitted, part of
which will be used to support the solar photovoltaic system.
Mr. Speaker, 

5
While we work on the generation side we must also look at the issue of power conservation.
By following the simple tips published by the Energy Commission and the PURC, we can
lower our electricity bills significantly.
I commend the Energy Commission for the successful start of the Refrigerator Energy
Efficiency Project under which the Commission is replacing old refrigerators with new energy
efficient ones for households at a discount. In Ghana, on average, refrigerators consume
more than one thousand, two hundred (1,200) kWh/year. If you consider that almost 30% of
households in Ghana have a minimum of two refrigerators, then a lot of energy can be saved.
We have also started the conversion of CFL bulbs to LED bulbs. In many areas, solar
powered LED street lights have been installed. This has the potential to reduce consumption
of power by lighted bulbs by up to 60%. In addition, the LED bulbs last longer, in some cases
up to15years.

AGENDA FOR TRANSFORMATION

Mr. Speaker,
The agenda to transform the structure of the economy and position it as an export-driven
rather than an import-focused economy is on course. United as one people and with
determined commitment to its attainment, we shall transform the structure of this economy.
As President, I am required by the provisions of Article 36, Clause 5 of our Constitution to
present to Parliament, a Coordinated Programme of Economic and Social Development
Policies, including agricultural and industrial programmes at all levels and in all regions of
Ghana within two years of assuming office. I have accordingly submitted to the 6th Parliament
of the 4th Republic of Ghana, The Coordinated Programme of Economic and Social
Development Policies 2014-2020, An Agenda for Transformation.

Mr. Speaker,
The Programme forms the core of my vision to transform, and covers a broad range of issues
in the areas of social and economic development, infrastructure and institutional
development. It also highlights a number of priority programmes and initiatives that
Government will be pursuing in the short to medium term. I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to the
debate of the Programme, which will feed into the preparation of a long-term national
development plan by the National Development Planning Commission (NDPC).
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST
Mr. Speaker,
Education remains the surest path to victory over ignorance, poverty and inequality This is
self evident in the bold initiatives we continue to take to improve access, affordability, quality
and relevance at all levels.
BASIC EDUCATION 

6
Mr. Speaker,
A decade and a half into the new millennium, we are providing, through our Basic Education
Programme, equitable access to good quality, child-friendly Universal Basic Education.
Through improvements in infrastructure and quality of teaching, provision of teaching and
learning materials, management and supervision of schools, quality and access to basic
education is being enhanced.
To provide opportunities for those who are unsuccessful in their Basic Education Certificate
Examination (BECE), we have for the first time, introduced a re-sit policy at the basic
education level. The policy was given true meaning when one thousand one hundred and
eighty-one (1,181) candidates last week had the chance to re-sit their BECE as private
candidates. These are persons who, but for this golden opportunity, would have otherwise
had their education terminated at the JHS level.
Mr. Speaker,
The story of a 46-year-old prisoner, Alexander Dorbaareh, and four other inmates who took
part in the re-sit in Wa in the Upper West Region reflects how golden and important the resit
policy is. The story of Alex Dorbaareh is similar to that of many others, aged between 16
and 56years, who took advantage of this unique opportunity to better their grades with the
hope of furthering their education.
As a nation, we must and we are creating the necessary opportunities for all children of
school going age to have access to quality education. We will continue to deliver social
intervention programmes that will sustain access and reduce the cost of education to
parents. This year, we will start with the distribution of ten thousand (10,000) locally produced
made-in-Ghana school sandals to pupils in selected deprived districts.
! Six million (6,000,000) textbooks,
! Five hundred thousand (500,000) pieces of school uniforms,
! Fifteen million (15,000,000) exercise books, and
! Thirty thousand (30,000) computers will also be distributed to schools across the
country.
I am convinced we have enough capacity locally to print this material. I have asked the
Minister for Education to ensure that domestic printing houses are involved in fulfilling this
huge order.
Mr. Speaker,
There are more children in school now than ever before. At the close of the 2013/14
academic year, over 5.4 million children were enrolled at the basic education level. This
compares to a total enrolment figure of 4.6 million in the 2008/2009 academic year.

To consolidate our attainment of Universal Basic Education, twenty-four thousand, one
hundred and seventeen (24,117) out-of-school children were enrolled into school under the
Complementary Basic Education (CBE) programme, which began in 2014. Through this, more
of our rural poor were offered opportunities to be educated in 4 regions- Northern, Upper
East, Upper West and Brong Ahafo. One hundred thousand (100,000) out-of-school children
are being recruited this year to expand the programme to cover the remaining six regions. 

7
Mr. Speaker,
Our focus on quality education requires the enhancement of teaching skills. To that end,
about one hundred and sixty thousand (160,000) teachers, representing 56% of teachers at
the basic education level received career development training. Another one thousand
(1,000) teachers have also undergone In-Service Training in line with the objective of
improving the teaching of mathematics and science. We shall continue with our interventions
to improve the teaching and learning of Mathematics and Science across the country.
We envisage that this will help us meet the target of 60:40 in favour of the sciences as against
humanities at the tertiary level. This is in line with our national development objectives.
Mr. Speaker,
As this House is aware, gender parity at the basic level remains a major priority in our
education policy. We have attained a 1:1 Gender parity ratio. Over ninety-two thousand
(92,000) girls have benefitted from the take-home ration programme in the Upper East,
Upper West and Northern Regions.
Under the Global Partnership for Education Programme, fifty-five thousand (55,000) girls in
Junior High School will also receive scholarships, school uniforms, sandals, bags and
stationery.
I am pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that the school shift system, through which pupils run
shifts due to lack of adequate classrooms, has now been eliminated in many of our districts.
In Wa, Sunyani Municipal, Tarkwa, Dansoman, Krachi Ntsumuru in the Volta Region and
many other areas, school children can no longer skip school to play truant hiding behind the
excuse of the shift system.
SECONDARY EDUCATION
Mr. Speaker,
Enrolment at the second cycle level has increased by about 10% between 2013 and 2014.
This is the direct result of the general improvement in teaching and learning and provision of
critical infrastructure. More than a 1000 different projects, ranging from dormitories,
classrooms, dining halls, auditoriums and administration blocks have been executed in
secondary schools across the country.
In fulfillment of my vision to expand access to quality education, construction work is
ongoing on the initial 73 Community Day Senior High Schools. Work will begin this year in 50
other locations. This year, we shall also commence the implementation of a number of
interventions under a US$156 million Secondary Education Improvement Programme. The
interventions include:
! Improving facilities and quality of education in 125 existing Secondary Schools
! Providing ten thousand, four hundred (10,400) needy students with scholarships
! Building the capacity of six thousand, five hundred (6,500) Mathematics, Science and
ICT Teachers and
! Providing leadership training for heads of second cycle schools 

8
Mr. Speaker,
The last phase of our Science Resource Centre project, which will benefit one hundred (100)
Senior High Schools will commence this year.
As I announced in my last State of the Nation Address, Government will begin the
implementation of the Progressively Free Secondary Education Programme at the start of
the 2015/2016 academic year in September. This will benefit an estimated three hundred and
sixty-seven thousand, five hundred and sixty-five (367,565) day students.
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, Honourable Members of this August House have approved
adequate financing for this programme in the 2015 budget.
Mr. Speaker,
My resolve to expand access, improve quality and to ensure affordability was accentuated
when we analysed the results of the WASSCE over the years. Between 2006, when the
WASSCE began, and 2014, the best performance indexed on students who attained grades
A1 to C6 was in the year 2012. The worst performance was recorded in 2007.
In 2012, 31.19% of the students attained grades A1-C6. In the worst performing year, 2007
only 10.58% made grades A1-C6. This is followed closely by 12.95% in 2008. This shows
progress. These statistics demonstrate modest gains but there is more room for
improvement. I will continue to work with all stakeholders to achieve measurable
improvements in the results over the next few years. I call on all parents and opinion leaders
to join me to ensure that our students commit much more time, than ever before to their
studies.
TERTIARY
Mr. Speaker,
Our policy thrust at the tertiary education level remains the maintenance of high standards,
achieving equity and ensuring relevance within the context of producing high caliber
manpower able to fit into the world of work and lead our transformation agenda. In the
2013/2014 academic year, enrolment into Universities increased by 7.1%, 3.4% for
Polytechnics and 63.8% at the Colleges of Education.
Work on the main campus of the University of Health and Allied Sciences (UHAS), located at
Sokode Lokoe near Ho is almost complete. The University has also admitted its first batch of
medical students. At the University of Energy and National Resources, the first batch of
agriculture students has been admitted to the Dormaa campus. Expansion works will
continue at the main campus in Sunyani.
In line with our policy to establish a public university in each region, Government has
presented to parliament, a bill for the establishment of a University for Environment and
Sustainable Development in the Eastern Region. Preparatory works for the construction of a
main campus for the University will commence this year. 

9
Mr. Speaker,
I have received an interim report on the possible conversion of some campuses of the
University for Development Studies (UDS) into autonomous institutions. Further to that,
Government will, explore the processes towards converting the Wa and Navrongo
Campuses of the UDS into autonomous Universities in the Upper West and Upper East
Regions.
Mr. Speaker,
I am impressed with the progress of work on two historic projects- a new office complex for
the Ghana Academy of Arts and Sciences and a new Secretariat for the Association of African
Universities.
Government is also working towards the vision to improve access to quality education at the
tertiary level, through the deployment of ICT in distance learning. In this regard, a US$37.5
million Distance Education ICT facility has been established, linking all the 10 regional
distance education centres of the University of Ghana.
The facility includes three thousand (3,000) Internet-ready tablets for students, video
conferencing facilities and smart lecture theatres.
Mr. Speaker,
In my address last year, I called for support from Honourable Members and the Academic
fraternity for our decision to establish a National Research Fund. A draft bill for the
establishment of the fund is currently undergoing stakeholders’ consultation and review. We
need the cooperation of all stakeholders to operationalize the fund.
Work on the conversion of Polytechnics to Technical Universities will progress with the
expected passage of the Technical Universities Bill this year. Conversion of each Polytechnic
will be assessed based on equipment, faculty and strong collaboration with industry. The
take-off date is September 2016. In preparation for the conversion, Government will scale up
our interventions in the nation’s Polytechnics, including a rigorous staff development
programme to meet our policy objectives. I am encouraged by the overwhelming
endorsement of the conversion by faculty, students, industry and alumni of the Polytechnics.
Mr. Speaker,
Under the Skills Development Fund of the COTVET, which is developing skills and
promoting technical and vocational training, over GH¢150 million in grants have been
provided to five hundred and ten (510) grantees made up of institutions, businesses and
associations. Some of the beneficiaries are the KNUST Jewellery Design and Technology
Centre, Progressive Electronic Technicians Association of Ghana, Ghana National
Association of Garages, Ghana National Association of Poultry Farmers and the Ghana
Association of Electrical Contractors.
This year, grants totaling GH¢65million have been earmarked to be disbursed to an
estimated 100 private sector firms. Through these interventions, technical and vocational
education graduates are being offered expanded opportunities to translate their knowledge
and skills into the creation of more jobs while at the same time transferring their skills to
others.

10
Mr. Speaker,
The implementation of these vital programmes and projects have been prioritized and
adequately budgeted for. Indeed the 2015 budget allocates to the education sector about
6.7 billion Ghana Cedis.
HEALTH
Mr. Speaker,
And still talking about budgetary allocations, we will this year spend over 3 billion Ghana
Cedis on the health sector. This huge allocation confirms our view that a good economy
resides in the health of our people. In the last few years, Government has pumped billions of
Ghana Cedis into the provision of modern hospitals and the upgrading of facilities to
facilitate speedy healthcare delivery. There are currently several major hospital projects
under construction, which when completed will collectively deliver approximately six
thousand (6,000) new hospital beds to facilitate access to improved health care by 2017.
The hospitals include:
1. A 617-bed University of Ghana Teaching Hospital
2. The 420-bed Ridge Hospital Expansion Project
3. A 104-bed Police Hospital Project
4. The 500-bed Military Hospital Project in Kumasi
5. The Second phase of the Tamale Teaching Hospital Expansion Project
which will add another 400 beds to the existing 400 beds
6. A 160-bed Upper West Regional Hospital
7. A 130-bed Maritime Hospital, Tema
8. The 295-bed Bolgatanga Regional Hospital
Mr. Speaker,
Additionally, work is at various stages of completion on 13 district hospitals to bring health
services closer to our people. These include 120-bed facilities at Dodowa, Fomena,
Kumawu, Abetifi, Garu-Tempane, Sekondi and in Takoradi where the old European hospital
is being refurbished. We are also constructing 60-bed hospitals at Tepa, Nsawkaw, Konongo,
Madina, Salaga and Twifo-Praso.
We have also completed and commissioned for use, three district hospitals in Edjumako,
Essam and Zabzugu, and 19 Health Centres at the following locations- Amasaman, Doffor,
Pokukrom, New Jejeti, Paakro, Gwollu, Funsi, Sang, Northern Buipe, Manso Nkwanta,
Abuakwa, Mase Sosekpe, Kedzi, Adamso, Kayoro, Timonde, Bonsu Nkwanta and Dadieso.
This year, we shall commence the construction of 15 polyclinics, 10 in the Central Region.
These will be located at Besease, Gomoa Dawurampong, Biriwa, Etsii Sunkwa and Esikuma
Gyamera. The rest are Agona Duakwa, Bimpong Akunfude, Ekumfi Naakwa, Twifo Atimokwa
and Gomoa Postin. The remaining 5 polyclinics to be constructed in the Greater Accra
Region will be located at Adentan, Ashiaman, Bortianor, Oduman and Sege.
Mr. Speaker, 

11
The provision of modern diagnostic and treatment equipment under the National Medical
Equipment Replacement Programme has been expanded to cover 150 hospitals across the
country.
All Teaching Hospitals, all Regional Hospitals, 125 District Hospitals, 14 Health Centers and 8
mobile clinics have benefited from the programme. The equipment received by the
institutions vary from new Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Computerized Tomography
(CT) Scan, Fluoroscopy, X-ray and Digital Mammography machines, Oxygen Plants, and
Ambulances.
Under this programme, the nation’s foremost teaching hospital at Korle Bu, the Korle Bu
Teaching Hospital received significant resources to respectively replace and rehabilitate
obsolete equipment and theatres.
Mr Speaker,
The Pediatric Surgery Theatre, which remained closed for almost eight years, the General
Surgery Theatre, the Neo-natal Intensive Care and the Babies’ Units have all been
refurbished and currently operational.
The St. Joseph Hospital in Nkwanta, the Adidome Hospital, the Dodo Pepesu Hospital and
the Jasikan Government Hospital, all in the Volta Region have also benefitted from the
National Medical Equipment Replacement Programme.

Mr. Speaker,
Outpatient utilization of the National Health Insurance Scheme went up to twenty- seven
million, four hundred thousand (27.4 million) in 2014. That is a sure sign of the benefits of the
Scheme to many of our citizenry.
We will strengthen the fraud detection capacity of the scheme in order to eliminate detect
and sanction facilities and personnel who take advantage of the system. This week, a portion
of outstanding claims is being disbursed to health providers. Government will work to review
the scheme to ensure its sustainability.
Mr. Speaker,
In January this year, the nation’s health delivery effort was severely threatened by a fire
outbreak at the Central Medical Stores, which resulted in the loss of medicines and
equipment estimated at GH¢356 million. The cause of the fire is currently under
investigation. Short-term measures have been put in place to mitigate the impact of the fire
including the ordering of very critical medicines to mitigate any risk of widespread shortages.
The Ministry of Health is reviewing the Health Sector Supply Chain Master Plan with a view to
improving the system of procurement.
The new Health Commodity Supply Chain system will undertake procurements through
framework contracts and use the economies of scale so derived to drive down prices to
impact positively on health commodity security and the sustainability of the NHIS. This
improved supply chain would also cover all other health facilities including the Central
Pharmacy of the Korle Bu Teaching Hospital.

12
We have made significant progress in reducing the incidence of HIV/AIDS and are on track
to achieve virtual elimination of mother to child transmission. We are also working with local
pharmaceutical companies to expand domestic supply of anti-retroviral drugs.


SOCIAL PROTECTION
Mr. Speaker,
As part of our commitment to the protection of the vulnerable, over ten thousand (10,000)
senior citizens are being provided free NHIS subscription in the Greater Accra, Central and
Eastern regions. Our senior citizens in communities such as La, Chorkor, Akoto Lante,
Madina, Teshie, Ashaiman, Nima and Nungua are benefitting from this package, and we will
be extending the exercise to other parts of the country.
Very often orphans and abandoned children find themselves in situations that leave them
homeless and vulnerable to the activities of social miscreants. Mr. Speaker, This is
unacceptable, and in line with our social protection policy, eight hundred (800) orphans have
been removed from previously inhumane environments and provided with shelter and care.
Another one thousand, four hundred (1,400) caregivers were trained in all regions to support
our social welfare programmes.
To protect abandoned children and orphans against exploitation and maltreatment, 62
orphanages whose operations fell below accepted standards have been closed down.
Mr. Speaker,
In fulfillment of our manifesto promise, we have launched the Eban Elderly Welfare Card, a
priority identity card that enables our senior citizens, 65 years and above, to travel at half fare
on Metro Mass Transit buses across the country. The Eban card also allows our aged priority
access to banks, hospitals among others. So far one thousand, two hundred (1,200) senior
citizens have been registered and received their Eban cards and are enjoying the benefits.
This year, 150,000 of the poorest households are to benefit from the LEAP programme.
Mr. Speaker,
As we work to meet the needs of people who live with disabilities through insistence on the
provision of access to new and existing infrastructure, the provision of teaching and learning
aids among others, Government is in discussions with the leadership of the Federation for
Persons with Disability to roll out this year, a new and suitable Youth Employment Model for
five thousand (5000) persons with disability.
SPORTS
Mr. Speaker,
Government will this year, put a desirable focus on other sporting disciplines other than
football, in order to contribute to their growth and the winning of more international medals
and competitions. 

13
In athletics for example, consistent planning and the personal motivation of our young
athletes earned Ghana our first Olympic Gold Medal in any sport, at any level. 17-year old
Martha Bissah from Kumasi who was among 12 other athletes, who won medals at the
African Championships in Morocco, went on to the Youth Olympic in China and snatched the
gold medal. Young Martha and her family were filled with joy and energy when I hosted
them at the Flagstaff House last year.
Mr. Speaker,
I agree with managers of our lesser-known sports that we can win more international medals.
Accordingly, Martha will be afforded an opportunity to join other young athletes on
scholarship in US Colleges where she can develop into senior level athletics. Government will
also partner with corporate Ghana to support the programmes of the various sporting
associations this year including the Swimming Association, which is producing very brilliant
and fast swimmers winning medals in international competitions.

Mr. Speaker,
I wish to once again congratulate the senior national team, the Black Stars for their
performance at the 2015 Africa Cup of Nations Tournament. Many Ghanaians lost hope in
the Black Stars ahead of the tournament in Equatorial Guinea. They gathered themselves
together, rose from the ashes of Brazil 2014 and proved themselves.
It is not the first silver medal for the Black Stars, but the developments from Brazil is what
changed the dynamics. Let me urge the Ghana Football Association to put a lot more focus
on the other national teams just like it does for the senior team, in order to adequately
prepare them for their international competitions as well. Also, the seeming total neglect of
the local football league is a matter of concern to all. I wish to urge the FA to turn its
attention to improving the quality of the local league and work towards making it attractive,
exciting and worth following.
On the development of sporting infrastructure, work is progressing speedily on the Cape
Coast Stadium and is expected to be completed this year.
BUILDING A STRONG AND RESILIENT ECONOMY
Mr. Speaker,
A year ago, I shared with this august House my vision to transform the structure of the
Ghanaian economy- transformation through diversification, value addition to our primary
products, the promotion and patronage of locally manufactured goods and services. This is
intended to make us self-reliant and position the country as an export-led economy to create
decent jobs.
The economic benefits of a diversified and transformed economy are enormous. As a people
we must make a conscious effort to eat what we grow, and add value to our primary raw
materials. This will support a stable economy and job creation, improved GDP per capita and
enhanced standards of living for the people.
Mr. Speaker, 

14
The initiatives introduced last have already started bearing fruit. In the area of rice
cultivation, for example, local production increased by 60%. According to the latest statistics
from the Bank of Ghana, our rice import bill fell by a whopping 41 percent, reducing from
US$467.2 million in 2013 to US$275.1 million in 2014.
On my fraternal visits as ECOWAS Chair to our sister countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea, at the height of the Ebola crisis, I donated 100 tons of food products to the 3
countries. Prominent among these products was a long-grain Made in Ghana rice brand
called “Pride”– a clear evidence of the pride I felt in presenting our own homegrown variety
to our neighbours in their time of difficulty. It is expected that as the Transformation Agenda
gains traction, we would be able to reduce our import bill on other commodities and indeed
be able to export some of the surplus.

Mr. Speaker,
Two weeks ago, I constituted a task force chaired by a former Deputy Governor of the Bank
of Ghana to work on the modalities for the establishment of a Ghana Export and Import
(EXIM) Bank that will consolidate all past efforts and become the key engine of the
development of Ghana’s exports. The Ghana EXIM Bank will act as an intermediary between
government and exporters, and assist our exporters to compete internationally by providing
insurance and finance facilities to support their overseas contracts.
Mr. Speaker,
In Komenda, in the Central Region, a new sugar factory is under construction. When
completed, we will be reducing significantly, the over US$300 million we spend annually on
sugar imports. We will also be able to support local industries, such as beverage and ice
cream manufacturers, who require large amounts of sugar for their products. Ghana imports,
on average, three hundred and seventy-five thousand (375,000) metric tons of sugar annually.
In addition to the Komenda factory, discussions have been concluded for another sugar
estate and factory in the Northern Region. Put together, the two plants should be able to
reduce by more than 80% the import of sugar in the coming years. The establishment of
these sugar plants will also create employment opportunities, especially for the youth, in
their host communities. The Komenda Sugar Factory alone will create seven thousand, three
hundred (7,300) direct and indirect jobs in addition to the savings on foreign exchange.
Mr. Speaker,
The poultry industry is one of the sub-sectors receiving major government attention and
benefiting from a policy to invest in strategic sectors to produce locally some of the products
on which we are currently expending a huge amount of foreign exchange. One year on, we
have launched a 20 million Broiler Project with a target to reduce the importation of poultry
by 40% by the end of next year, 2016 and save this economy about US$150 million. Indeed
latest statistics show that we have achieved a drop of 30% in poultry imports from $208.7
million to $149 million.
Our poultry farmers are already reaping the benefits associated with the increased demand
for their products on the domestic market as a result of this policy. The financial support to
poultry farmers from the Export Development and Agricultural Investment Fund is helping 

15
them re-organize their businesses and produce to meet local demand. This year, an
additional 200 poultry farmers will receive financial support as part of the broiler project.
Mr. Speaker,
Government has also extended support of GH¢51 million, to a number of local
pharmaceutical companies to expand their operations, retool their factories and obtain
critical certification to enable them meet international export standards. My working visits to
Ernest Chemist and Tobinco Pharmaceuticals reaffirmed my belief in what Ghanaian
industries can do when given the needed support. I am proud of the dominant role of
indigenous Ghanaian entrepreneurs in this particular sector of industry. This healthy
partnership with our pharmaceutical companies, including Dannex and DanAdams, will
continue and will be extended to other sectors to generate more decent work for the youth
of Ghana.
Mr. Speaker,
These successes have been attained within the context of a transition to a lower middleincome
country status and its attendant challenges, which include dwindling access to grants
and concessionary financing from our development partners, and a growing demand for
essential social services, by a growing and affluent middle class.
Notwithstanding the recent macroeconomic challenges, investor confidence in Ghana
continues to grow as a result of measures introduced to stabilize the economy. Last year,
inflows from foreign direct investment stood at US$3.57 billion from 184 projects.
The oversubscription of the 2014 US$1billion Eurobond as well as the US$1.7billion
syndicated loan for cocoa purchases is a further testimony of investor confidence in our
economy. Our subsequent market activities will target the development of infrastructure and
refinancing of the 2007 Eurobond.
The US$7 billion agreement for the development of the Sankofa field is easily the single
largest investment made in our petroleum sector.
SECURING OUR BRIGHT MEDIUM TERM PROSPECTS
Mr. Speaker,
In order to achieve policy certainty and attain broad support for our Home Grown Economic
Policies, we decided in August 2014 to open discussions with the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) for a three year Extended Credit Facility programme. As I address you this
morning negotiations are being concluded with an IMF mission team here in Accra and later
this afternoon I expect an announcement of a positive outcome of these discussions.
We have come this far as a result of the very fruitful stakeholder consultations during the
National Economic Forum held at Senchi, in the Eastern Region, in May of 2014. This forum
gave valuable input into government’s fiscal consolidation policy which proved very useful in
our negotiations with the IMF.
I wish to express the nation’s gratitude to all those who made the Forum possible. Among
many others may I express the nation’s gratitude to Her Ladyship the Chief Justice, former
President Jerry John Rawlings, Secretary General of the TUC, President of the Association of 

16
Ghana Industries, Mr. Kwame Pianim, Dr. Kwesi Botchwey, Dr. Patrick Awuah, and the late Sir
Engineer Paul Victor Obeng, who regrettably passed on only a day after the Senchi
consensus was reached. May his soul rest in peace.
I also wish to commend the members of my Presidential Advisory Group on the Economy
(PAGE) Mr. Kwame Pianim, Nana Oye Mansa, Dr. K.Y. Amoako, Dr. Kwesi Botchwey,
Governor Kofi Wampah, Seth Terkper and of course my Vice President Kwesi Bekoe
Amissah-Arthur. I have really benefitted and continue to benefit from their tireless efforts and
invaluable advice.
Mr. Speaker,
May I at this point commend our tripartite partners - Organised Labour and Employers- for
the understanding and sacrifice that culminated in an early conclusion of this year’s wage
negotiations. And in particular for keeping the wage level within budget limits. It
demonstrates a commitment by the social partners to work collectively to improve the
economy for our common good.
Collaboration with our social partners has seen a decline of the public sector wage bill as a
percentage of tax revenues from a high of 73% in 2012 to 49% at end of 2014. We still have
some way to go if we are to hit the recommended ECOWAS benchmark of 35%. Meanwhile,
the Fair Wages and Salaries Commission is expected to finalise work on the Category 2 and
3 allowances.
Aggressive work is continuing on cleaning the payroll and ridding it of ghosts. Cabinet
approved the recommendations of the inter-ministerial sub-committee and would work with
the private sector and our development partners to achieve a HRMIS and a pay roll that is
decentralized and has integrity.
Cabinet approved additional measures in order to make adjustments to the budget
following the dramatic decline in crude oil prices. It is estimated that Ghana stands to lose
about $700 million from oil exports if the price remains at current levels. I have asked the
Minister for Finance to engage with you Honourable members on the new measures.
Mr. Speaker,
As we did with the Sankofa (ENI-Vitol) Gas agreement, other critical projects such as the GE
Ghana 1000 project will be supported by Partial Risk Guarantees approved by Cabinet and
Parliament. The World Bank and the African Development Bank will issue these alternative
guarantee instruments.
Mr. Speaker,
Government is working to strengthen the National Pensions Regulatory Authority (NPRA) to
give it a greater degree of autonomy and decentralise its operations in the regions. A
Strategic Plan for the NPRA will be launched this year. I am confident the unresolved issues
such as the Unification and Past Credit and governance structure to manage Tier Two
Pensions will be addressed this year to the satisfaction of all parties.
I wish to assure all Pensioners of the safety OF and better investment returns ON their
pension funds. I advocate an enhanced relationship of trust with Ghanaian workers, a 

17
partnership and collective action anchored in the national interest. On our part, we pledge to
continue to work to achieve the strictest discipline in government expenditure.
In this regard, new initiatives would be rolled out this year to prevent the misuse of fuel,
telephone, electricity and water in public establishments.
REAL SECTOR PERFORMANCE – AGRIBUSINESS, TRADE AND INDUSTRY
Mr. Speaker,
In 2014, agriculture, industry and the services sectors continued on the trajectory of positive
growth with significant outputs in the fisheries, livestock and the construction sub-sectors. It
is worth noting that manufacturing has been identified as a major area where critical
attention is needed.
I am as a strategy, positioning Ghana to attract investors in the light industry, who are
currently looking for new destinations away from the increasing costly centres of China and
other parts of South East Asia.
Mr. Speaker,
To ensure food security and to assure our hardworking farmers of appreciable returns on
their investments, government will distribute 180,000 metric tonnes of fertilizer and continue
with the agriculture mechanization programme to make available in the districts more than
1,000 tractors and other implements including harvesters, threshers, planters and sprayers for
use by farmers. More than GH¢120 million has been made available to the rice, poultry, shea,
cashew and other agro-processing sub-sectors to boost production. Out of this, the rice
production sub-sector alone received GH¢22 million.
Mr. Speaker,
Over 60% of animal protein in the diets of Ghanaians is fish. Indeed, annual fish consumption
in Ghana is about 24kg per person, which is well above the world average of about 16.7kg
per person.
Our demand for fish outstrips supply by 50%. Government is determined to bridge the 50%
deficit through aquaculture development and the expansion of family fish farming across the
entire coast and inland water communities. Government aims to reduce the importation of
fish by at least 20% in the short term. Among other measures, Government will, this year,
facilitate the acquisition of three thousand (3,000) outboard motors for our fishermen.
Mr. Speaker,
A new fisheries cold store has also been completed in New Takoradi for the storage and
preservation of fish. Work is also progressing on the Fish Processing Factory at Elmina. I have
asked MASLOC to put together a revolving fund for the benefit our fishmongers along the
fishing communities. When I announced a GH¢10 million fund for the Youth Enterprise
Support (YES) Initiative, I assured the youth that the Initiative will be administered in a fair
and non-partisan manner. Since its launch in August 2014, the Secretariat has received a total
of two thousand and forty-eight (2,048) applications. 

18
Mr. Speaker,
Forty-five percent (45%) of the applications are for business start-ups in Agriculture and
Agribusiness and 24% to set-up Cottage Industries. Thirty-one percent (31%) of the
applications are however focused on the Services sector. This is an indication of the
enthusiasm of the youth to take advantage of government’s initiative to go into
entrepreneurship. The applications are currently been assessed.
Mr. Speaker,
Let me thank this Honourable House for the debate, the amendments and the inputs that
went into the passage of the Youth Employment Agency Bill, which is envisaged to employ
one hundred thousand (100,000) of our youth. This forms part of Government’s efforts to
create more jobs for the youth.
COCOA

Mr. Speaker,
The cocoa industry continues to play a pivotal role in our economy. The producer price of
cocoa has gone up by 62.74%, i.e. from three thousand, three hundred and ninety-two
Ghana Cedis (GH¢3,392.00) per tonne to five thousand, five hundred and twenty Ghana
Cedis (GHC 5,520.00) per tonne.
For the 2014/2015 cocoa season, the Ghana Cocoa Board will continue the free fertilizer
application (Hi-tech) programme for cocoa farms. The Board is also distributing a total of fifty
million (50,000,000) improved cocoa seedlings free of charge to farmers. Ahead of that, it has
recruited four thousand (4,000) people in 87 cocoa growing communities who have planted
and are nursing the seedlings.
Mr. Speaker,
On the occasion of the second anniversary of my administration last month, I spent the day in
the cocoa growing community of Assin Senchem in the Central Region. I was on the farm of
a young cocoa farmer, Samuel Torbi, and his enthusiastic young friends who have all taken to
cocoa farming. I felt encouraged that there is an emerging young generation of cocoa
farmers who will take over from the older generation. I invited Mr. Torbi and his friends to be
my guest at this State of the Nation event and I presume he should be in the gallery
somewhere.
Mr. Speaker,
I have requested Cocobod to unveil a programme to acquire land to engage more young
people in cocoa farming.
Mr. Speaker,
Markets play an important role in the socio-economic development of our people. Markets
support our women empowerment agenda, revenue mobilization efforts of the MMDAs and
provide direct or indirect employment for a substantial proportion of the active labour force.
Historically, many of our important settlements including Kumasi and Cape Coast owe their
rapid expansion to commerce. I am happy to report to the House that reconstruction work 

19
on the new Kotukuraba in Cape Coast and Aboabo in Tamale are progressing steadily. Work
on the Ho Central Market is ongoing and construction of the new Kumasi Central Market will
begin soon.
Mr. Speaker,
Tourism continues to be a major foreign exchange earner after gold, cocoa and foreign
remittances. In 2014 a total of 319,000 direct and indirect jobs were created. The Ministry of
Tourism, Culture and Creative Arts will continue to promote festivals and events such as the
Homowo festival, Emancipation Day, Okwahuman Paragliding, National Chocolate Day
among others.
We shall continue to strengthen the linkages between hotels, catering and tourism by
building capacity through the Hotel Catering and Tourism Training Institute (HOTCATT).
Through these efforts the Creative Arts industry will be offered enhanced outlets for the
industry to flourish. I look forward to an enhanced and mutually beneficial partnership
between the creative arts industry and Government in the coming months.


EXPANDING INFRASTRUCTURE FOR GROWTH

Mr. Speaker,
While we continue to build more hospitals and schools, other critical sectors such as water,
roads, transport, ICT and Telecommunication sectors continue to engage our attention.
Development of key infrastructure is not only for job creation but also for general socioeconomic
transformation.
It is estimated that Ghana suffers an infrastructural funding gap of about US$1.5 billion a
year. While creating a conducive environment for the private sector to participate in
infrastructure development, government in 2014 took a decisive step and started the process
for the establishment of a Ghana Infrastructure Investment Fund (GIIF).
The Fund, which is financed by receipts from a VAT levy and contributions from tax, which
has a funding mechanism already approved by Parliament, 2.5% of VAT receipts, The GIIF
will serve as a vehicle to mobilize resources to scale-up the development of critical
infrastructure in the country. It will also help in implementation of a more sustainable debt
management strategy, which focuses on viable commercial projects with appreciable return
on investment and repayment mechanisms through escrows and debt service accounts.
Mr. Speaker,
With the GIIF, we should reduce the funding gap for infrastructure projects considerably and
execute projects needed to help drive our desired growth as a lower middle-income country.
WATER
Mr. Speaker, 

20
We have spent in excess of US$1.1 billion on the construction of new water systems, and
expansion of some existing ones across the country. Water is a basic necessity of life, yet for
many decades, vast sections of our people had no access to it, contributing to the spread of
water-related diseases. Today, thanks to massive improvements in potable water supply, the
World Health Organisation (WHO) after evaluating Ghana last year, revealed that we have
successfully eradicated the Guineaworm disease. We are awaiting the appropriate
certification to that effect
We have over the last two years reversed significantly the unacceptable hardship many of our
women and children, especially, go through in their search for water. Across the length and
breadth of the country, various water projects are ongoing and others are at various stages
of completion. At the end of this year, 2015, we will be covering 76% of the entire country,
both rural and urban areas with good drinking water.
This is in fulfillment of the prescriptions of the National Water Policy and the work
programme of the 2012 Manifesto of the NDC, which seeks to achieve 100% water coverage
for our people by 2025.
Mr. Speaker,
In fulfillment of the pledge I made during my address last year to complete and deliver a
number of major water projects, I am happy to report that on the eve of last year’s Christmas,
I recently commissioned Kpong Water Expansion Projectand opened the valve to commence
the flow of 20 million gallons of water to households and businesse in the northeastern part
of Accra. An additional 20 million gallons is available and scheduled to start flowing at end of
this month to achieve the set daily capacity of the plant, which is 40 million gallons of water
per day.
For the over seven hundred thousand (700,000) residents whose taps were running for the
first time in almost 2 decades and over, it was a pleasant Christmas Bonus. These residents
include those living in Adenta, Adjiriganor, Ashaley Botwe, North, East and West Legon,
Madina, Haatso and their environs.
Mr. Speaker,
Last year, in July, we completed work on the Kpong Intake Rehabilitation Project, which is
currently contributing 3.3 million gallons of water per day to the Greater Accra Metropolitan
Area Water System. Beneficiary communities include Dodowa, Ningo, Prampram all in the
Greater Accra Region and the Akuapem Ridge in the Eastern Region.
Still on the water sector, we also completed the Accra-Tema Metropolitan Area Water
Supply Project, which has added nine million two hundred thousand (9.2 million) gallons per
day to water supply in the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area. This has improved water supply
to an estimated quarter of a million inhabitants.
Mr. Speaker,
The beneficiary communities include:
1. Michel Camp, Afienya and surrounding areas
2. Ayitepa, Kponguno, Omankope, Doyumu and surrounding areas
3. Bawalashie, Oyibi, Amanfro and surrounding areas

21
4. Fafraha, Ayikuma, Abokobi, Pantang and surrounding areas
5. Aperade, Adukrom, Awukugua, Dawu and surrounding areas
7. Akropong, Mamfe, Amanokrom, Tutu and surrounding areas
7. New Senchi, Akrade, Senchi and surrounding areas
Mr. Speaker,
We have also introduced into our water production mix, a Desalination Water Project, which
is the first ever, desalination plant in this country. The Teshie-Nungua plant is currently
supplying 13.2 million gallons of water per day to about half a million people in Teshie,
Nungua, the Teshie military barracks, Batsoona, Sakumono and parts of La-Dadekotopon.
Total water supply to the capital, Accra, has therefore increased by more than 65.7 million
gallons of water per day. Through these investments we have therefore outstripped the
demand for water in the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area by 2.7 million gallons per day.
Mr. Speaker,
The vision to end totally the problems of water shortages has not been limited to the urban
parts of the country or to Accra alone. New water systems have been completed and
commissioned at Anyinam, Kibi, Osenase, Apedwa and Kwabeng. The Asante Mampong
Water Supply Project is also now supplying the inhabitants of Damang, Daaho, Basafour,
Besease, Kyeremfaso, Krobo, Mpenya, Dadease, Bonkron, Nsuta, and Beposo with water.
The Nsawam Water Supply Project and the Essakyir Water Project have also been
completed. From the Upper East and Upper West Regions through Sunyani in the Brong
Ahafo Region down to Accra, many more projects are at various stages of completion to
bring relief to our people.
Mr. Speaker,
We have already set in motion the processes to meet future demand in view of population
growth. Plans are being finalized to undertake the following projects to ensure reliability and
sustainability of water supply from 2015 to the year 2030. These include the Kpong Water
Supply Expansion Phase 2, Weija Water Supply Expansion and the Asutsuare Water Supply
Projects.
Mr. Speaker,
One other critical area of focus for Government is housing. The estimated housing deficit for
Ghana is 1.7 million. Projects targeting the middle to lower income bracket and giving them
an opportunity to own decent homes are being rolled out.
Largely focused in the towns and cities, include:
! A five thousand (5000) affordable housing project, which is underway at Saglemi in
the Ningo District of the Greater Accra Region. The first 200 houses should be ready
for occupancy by the close of this year.
! 168 housing units with related infrastructure has been completed and handed over to
the security services. Work on an additional three hundred and sixty-eight (368)
housing units under the second phase of this project has also started. 

22
! Another five thousand (5,000) affordable housing units, branded ‘Nyame Dua estates,
also in Kpone, is almost 70% complete.
! We have also made considerable progress towards completing a total of four
thousand, seven hundred and twenty (4,720) affordable housing units in five regions
of the country. These were started in 2006 in the Greater Accra, Ashanti, Northern,
Upper West and Eastern regions.


Mr. Speaker,
To further consolidate the gains, we are developing the following:
! A National Housing Policy
! A Ghana Building Code and Review of Building Regulations
! Legislation on Condominium Properties and the
! Establishment of a Regulatory agency for the Real Estate sector.
ROADS
Mr. Speaker,
We are working on many road projects to open up the country to reduce road traffic
accidents, boost economic activities, and bring foodstuffs to the market centres with ease.
Despite the large number of road projects underway, there still remains a lot to be done in
the sector. There is however considerable evidence to show that no effort is being spared to
fix the country’s roads. This year we are beginning what would be the single largest
intervention in the road sector in this country.
The project would see investments of about GH¢1 billion in roads commencing this year and
ending in 2019 during my second term in office. These projects will be funded with a mix of
Cocoa infrastructure fund financing and Government of Ghana budgetary support.
Mr. Speaker,
In the Western Region work is progressing steadily on the 110km Agona Junction- Elubo
road, the 94km Tarkwa-Bogoso-Ayamfuri road and the 52km Ayamfuri- Asawinso roads.
Other roads works in the region that will see intensified work include Sefwi-Bekwai-Eshiem,
Sefwi Wiawso-Akontombra, Prestea- Samreboi, Benchema-Oseikojokrom and the JuabesoBodi-
Akontombra roads.
In the Sekondi- Takoradi Municipality, 20 kilometres of the town roads have been asphalted
while work is about to start on another 25 kilometres. Construction work is also ongoing on
the Kansaworodo bypass, Fijai bypass and Ntankofo link to help improve access within the
twin city.
Mr. Speaker,
Work has resumed on lots 2 and 4 of the Eastern Corridor Road in the Volta Region. These
are the Asikuma Junction-Kpeve, Dodo Pepesu- Nkwanta, Nkwanta-Oti Damanko stretches. 

23
A number of roads have meanwhile been completed in the region and others ongoing.
These are: the Sogakope-Battor, Juapong-Fodzoku- Torgome, Kete Krachi-Buya, Ho-Fume,
Worawora- Dambai, Bame- Dzolokpuita-Kpedze, Ho-Adidome, Adutor-Akutukope, among
others.
The others are, Metrikasa-Havedzi, Golokwati-Wli-Hohoe roads, Tadzewu town roads, and
the Hohoe town roads.
Mr. Speaker,
Here in the capital, the various road projects are visible to all regular users of our roads. The
East Legon enclave roads have been resurfaced and others constructed. The Kwame
Nkrumah Interchange is changing the landscape of the centre of Accra while the works on
the Giffard (El Wak) Road is progressing smoothly. Even before it is opened fully to traffic,
the benefits of the 37 – La Palm junction road are been felt.
The Awoshie- Pokuase Road has been opened to traffic pending the final completion of
works and other ancillary social intervention projects like markets, a hospital, schools and a
lorry park. Also ongoing in Accra are the Burma Camp Road Phase 1 and 2, the Spintex Road
bypass, the Nungua-Sakumono Beach Road and the Ashaiman Highway Road.
This year, we will commence work on the redevelopment of the Accra-Tema Motorway into a
six-lane highway with interchanges. Resurfacing works will also take place on roads in North
and South Kanda, James Town, Adabraka, Mamprobi, Chorkor, Adenta and Madina.
Mr. Speaker,
The 147-kilometre Fufulso-Sawla Road in the Northern Region is almost complete while the
Buipe-Tamale road asphalt overlay has been completed. The Nakpanduri-Oti Damanko
portion of the Eastern Corridor and I will join the people in that section of the road to cut the
sod for commencement of road works.
In the Central Region, work on the Kasoa Interchange, which comes with a major communityupgrading
component involving the construction of schools, hospitals and water projects
would commence in the coming weeks. This project will remove one of the most frustrating
bottlenecks in the country’s road network.
The Kasoa bypass, Mankessim-Abura Dunkwa, Assin-Twifo Praso, Essiam Town roads and the
Breman Asikuma-Amanfopong road are but a few of the ongoing works to improve roads in
the Region.
Mr. Speaker,
In the Eastern region, work has resumed on the Kwafokrom- Apedwa road and will be
completed in 12 months. Also to receive renewed attention this year are the NsawamApedwa
road, Nsawam-Aburi, the Suhum-Asamankese and Nkawkaw- Atibie roads. The
Oterkpolu- Odumase road has also been awarded on contract.
Mr. Speaker, 

24
In Ashanti Region, work on the Sofoline Interchange would be completed this year. Last year
I commissioned the Assin Praso- Bekwai Road, which came with a two-lane bridge over the
Pra River. I also inspected some 20km of Kumasi town roads, which have been upgraded.
Another 40km of Kumasi roads will be upgraded this year. Other major projects ongoing in
the region include Bomfa Junction- Asiwa-Bekwai, Bekwai-Ampaha-Asiwa, Kumawu-TimaateDrobonso
and Agyenkwaso-Anomabu-Gyadem roads.

Mr. Speaker,
In the Brong Ahafo Region, the Nsawkaw-Namase section of the Wenchi-Sampa Road,
Berekum-Sampa, Atebubu-KwameDanso-Kwadwokrom, Goaso-Kukuom Junction, PrangKintampo,
Kintampo- Abease and Dormaa Ahenkro-Nkrankwanta roads are receiving
attention.
In the Upper East Region, the Navrongo-Tumu, Navrongo-Tono, Bolgatanga-Bongo and
Wikongo-Tongo Roads as well as the Bolga-Bawku, Misiga-Kulungugu and Sandema-Wiesi
roads are going to receive aggressive attention.
In the Upper West Region, the Nadowli-Lawra-Hamile, Wa-Bulenga and Wa-Dorimon, WaHan,
Tumu-Han and Navrongo-Tumu roads together with the construction of steel bridges
on the Yala-Sombisi, Tantale-Tuvuu, Tuvuu-Lzabisi and Wa-Walewale Roads demonstrate our
commitment to giving the people of the region motorable roads.
Under the Cocoa Roads Project, a number of feeder, urban and highway roads are
earmarked for construction.
Under the Feeder roads, we have the following:

ASHANTI REGION
Bitumen Surfacing of Ataase Nkwanta-Owusukrom Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Manfo-Subriso-Fanti Feeeder Road
CENTRAL REGION
Bitumen Surfacing Of Camp-Adjoum Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Of Brofuyedur-Odoo Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Of Nkwanta – Mempesem Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Jamra – Adandan Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Of Ekwamoase – Ofabil Feeder Road
EASTERN REGION
Bitume Surfacing Of Noyem – Winso – Amuana –Praso Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Of Mangoase – Kukua Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Of Chia-Brenase-Ofoase Feeder Road
WESTERN REGION
Bitumen Surfacing Of Akim Sekyere – Abekoase Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Juaboso-Dadieso Feeder Road 

25
Bitumen Surfacing of Anto Dompem-Daboase Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Edwenase – Atobiase
VOLTA REGION
Bitumen surfacing of Dapaa Jn.- Pampawie-Ahamansu Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Lekanti-Nanankor Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Aburubuwa-Obanda Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Dodi Papaase-Mensahkrom-Asuboi Feeder Road
BRONG AHAFO REGION
Bitumen Surfacing of Dadiesoaba-Twabidi Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Dormaa Ahenkro-Baabianiha Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing AND Rehabilitation of Antwirifo-Danyame Feeder Road
Rehabillitation of Asuadei Jn. -Asuadei Feeder Road
Under Urban Roads, the following roads have been earmarked.
ASHANTI REGION
Rehabilitation of Selected Roads in New Edubiase
Rehabilitation of Bekwai Town Roads

BRONG AHAFO REGION
Rehabilitation of Dormaa Ahenkro Town Roads
Construction of Goaso Town Roads

CENTRAL REGION
Rehabilitation of Dunkwa Town Roads

WESTERN REGION
Rehabilitation of Sefwi Wiawso Town Roads
Rehabilitation of Daboase Town Roads
EASTERN REGION
Rehabilitation of Suhum Town Roads
Partial Construction of Kyebi Town Roads
Construction of Selected Roads in Asamankese
The following highways are to be constructed under the cocoa roads.
ASHANTI REGION
Upgrading of New Edubiase - Anomabo Road
Upgrading of Amantia - Obuasewa Road
Partial Reconstruction of Obuasi Jn - Dunkwa - Ayanfuri Road
BRONG AHAFO REGION
Upgrading of Gambia No.2 - Kyeremasu 

26
Partial Reconstruction of Tepa Jn. - Goaso Road
Upgrading of Kofibadukrom Junction - Kofibadukrom
CENTRAL REGION
Upgrading of Dunkwa - Twifo Praso - Assin Fosu

WESTERN REGION
Upgrading of Akontombra - Sefwi Wiawso
Upgrading of Daboase - Atieku Road
Upgradng of Enchi - Dadieso Road
Upgrading of Akontombra - Bodi Road
Rehabilitation of Anyinabrem - Sui - Bodi Junction Road
Upgrading of Adwofua - Oseikojokrom Road
VOLTA REGION
Upgrading of Kete - Krachi - Buya
Upgrading of Shia Honuta Kpedze Road

EASTERN REGION
Partial Reconstruction of Suhum-Asamankese
Partial Reconstruction of Adieso - Asamankese
Partial Reconstruction of Nsawam (Adieso) - Asamankese
Partial Reconstruction of Osenase - Akwatia
Partial Reconstruction of Apedwa - Kyebi - Bunso
Partial Reconstruction of Koforidua - Bunso
Mr. Speaker, a number of feeder roads have been selected under the second phase of the
cocoa roads. Under this phase, the following will be constructed.

ASHANTI
Bitumen Surfacing of Dawusaso-Ayiem-Dawenase Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Abodom-Dotom-Subriso Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Subriso Jn.-Subriso Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Amanchia-Tetrem Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Nfensi-Asakraka-Nkontomire-Nerebehi Feeder Road Phase 1
Bitumen Surfacing of Anyinasuso-Abonsuaso-Nyameadom-Danyame Feeder Road Phase 1
EASTERN
Rehabilitation of Anyinabrem-Amagyei Jn. Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Railway Station-Subresu Feeder Road
Spot Improvement of Moffram-Apinto Feeder Road
Spot Improvement of Atiakwama Nkwanta-Camp Nkwanta Feeder Road
Spot Improvement of Odumasi-Ayirebi Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Akoase-Subriso-Ntronang Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Larbikrom-Badukrom Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Tweapease-Behenese Jn. Feeder Road
Spot Improvement Kwaboanta Jn-Amarko Brekumanso Jn.Feeder Road 

27
Bitumen Surfacing of Akoase-Akadewaso Feeder Road
Improvement of Anwiaso-Congo-Adeikrom-Akim Manso Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Anfaso-K Anumah Feeder Road


WESTERN
Bitumen Surfacing of Georgekrom Jn.-Georgekrom-New Brekum Feeder Road
Spot Improvement of Kakabo Jn.-Kakabo Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Juaboso Nkwanta-Bonsu Nkwanta Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Adabokrom-Camp 15 Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Asawinso-Mile 81 Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Anyinase-Kwesikrom Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Owusukrom Jn.-Owusukrom Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Kwasuo-Gyankufa Feeder Road and Others
Rehabilitation of JohnKrom-Attakrom Feeder Road and Others
BRONG AHAFO
Rehabilitation Akrodei Kanchiamoa Feeder Road
Rehabilitation of Asumura Tipokrom Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Bopa Fordjourkrom Feeder Road Phase 1
Upgrading of Yamfo-Asuadei-Ansin Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Sankore-Abuom-Nankete Feeder Road
CENTRAL
Bitumen Surfacing of Afranse-Nyarkrom Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Buabin-Brentuokrom-Bretuokrom Jn.Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing Nyarkrom-Bobikuma Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Diaso-Asamang Feeder Road
Bitumen Surfacing of Nkwantanum-Asaman Feeder Road
Phase II of the Highways and Urban roads would also be awarded by April this year.
TRANSPORT
Mr. Speaker,
Government has embarked on a programme to expand facilities and address the growing
needs of our maritime business community and neighbouring landlocked countries.
We have already completed, under phase one of the Takoradi Port Expansion Programme,
the construction of 1.18km of breakwater into the sea. Currently ongoing is the dredging and
reclaiming of the sea to construct the leeside breakwater to create berthing facilities for
direct loading and unloading of bauxite and manganese exports as well as clinker and
limestone imports.
The Ghana Ports & Harbours Authority and the Meridian Port Services are collaborating to
expand the Tema Port to create several hectares of port operational area including deep
draft berths for vessels drawing 15m of water or more. The total investment is estimated a 

28
above $1.5bn. The first berth under this project should be completed by October 2016. In all,
there will be 4 berths of 1400 quay length that will have capacity of almost 3million TEUs. In
addition a 450m jetty is currently under construction inside Tema to allow for the fast
discharge of bulk cargo in particular cement and clinker. This project should be ready for use
by the first quarter of 2016.
Mr. Speaker,
The Ghana Maritime Authority has installed a Vessel Traffic Management Information System
(VTMIS), while work is also almost complete on the development of the Takoradi Logistics
Platform to provide warehousing facilities for the oil and gas industry.
To improve transportation on the Volta Lake, 3 units of 50-seater high-speed passenger
ferries have been procured and delivered to Akosombo for assembling while the
construction of a 1-unit modular passenger/cargo ferry has also been completed and ready
for shipment. The ferries will be in operation by the second quarter of next year.
Mr. Speaker,
Massive investment continues to be made to further develop and upgrade the country’s
aviation infrastructure. Increasing volumes of passengers and cargo, have exacted a toll on
the country’s only international airport, the Kotoka International Airport and stretched it to its
limit. Last year over forty thousand flights were recorded at our airports. In the same period
total passenger throughput stood at over 2.5 million compared with a little over 1.3 million in
2009. This represents an almost 100% increase.
The arrival Hall expansion project in terminal II is nearing completion. Parts of the new arrival
hall have in fact been opened for use. It will be fully completed this year. Work will also start
by the second quarter of this year on an ultra-modern International Terminal to be known as
Terminal 3.
Mr. Speaker,
In July last year, work begun on the Tamale International Airport project. The first phase of
the project will be completed by the end of the year. Phase two will see the construction of a
modern terminal and a dedicated Hajj terminal for Muslims embarking on the Holy
Pilgrimage to Mecca.
Mr. Speaker,
The first Phase of the Kumasi International Airport project involving the modernization of the
runway, installation of critical Aeronautical Ground Lighting (AGL) system and Instrument
Landing Systems among other equipment has been completed. Night operations into
Kumasi have indeed commenced. I hear the night flights are very popular with members of
this house whose constituencies are in Ashanti because they are able to finish their work in
this August house and catch the night flight to arrive in Kumasi while the fufu and akrantie is
still hot.
Phase two of the project will involve an ultra-modern terminal building and further extension
of the runway to accommodate bigger aircrafts.
Mr. Speaker, 

29
Government is committed to the redevelopment of the railway industry in line with the
recently completed Ghana Railway Master Plan. The plan entails the reconstruction and
modernization of the existing rail network to be followed by the extension of rail lines to
other regions.
Suburban rail services will start on the Takoradi to Sekondi line, via Kojokrom in the third
quarter to ease the ever-increasing road congestion and reduce travel time between the twin
cities. The Ghana Railway Company will be deploying new air-conditioned diesel multiple
train units on the line.
Other projects that are being developed by the Ghana Railway Development Authority
include the reconstruction of the Accra to Nsawam and the Kumasi – Ejisu suburban rail lines.
The construction of these lines is strategic since they form sections of the main lines while
their completion in the interim will help reduce the road congestion.
As part of the eastern railway line redevelopment plan, a rail link between the Tema Port and
the Boankra Inland port will be developed to improve the operational efficiency of the Tema
port and make it a preferred port especially for the shippers of our landlocked countries of
Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger.
Mr. Speaker,
To provide the Ghanaian public with greater options and flexibility in road transport, public
transportation is being improved through the acquisition of a total of four hundred and
ninety (490) buses to strengthen the operations of two public transport companies namely
the Metro Mass Transit and the Intercity STC and the implementation of the Bus Rapid
Transit (BRT) project. Some of these buses have been designed to allow for easy access by
persons with disability.
Mr. Speaker,
The Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority (DVLA) has since September last year
commenced the enforcement of non-registration of vehicles without seat belts and
compulsory installation of same. This is a key step towards ensuring the safety of passengers
and the reduction in casualties during road accidents.
This has become even more necessary in view of the road accident statistics gathered
between January and September 2014, which showed that 10,061 road traffic crashes were
recorded in the country involving 15,600 vehicles. A staggering 1,441 deaths and 8,802
injuries were recorded.
ICT AND TELECOMMUNICATION

Mr. Speaker,
Last year I promised to complete the Eastern corridor fibre optic project, which will serve
over 120 communities along the route from Ho to Bawku with a link from Yendi to Tamale. I
wish to report that the project has been completed. The overall optic fibre installation is over
eight hundred kilometres (800km). The fibre has also been extended to the University of
Health and Allied Sciences.

30
The project will open up the Eastern Corridor to the information superhighway and offer not
only teaching and learning opportunities but also bring the digital economy closer to the
area.
Mr. Speaker,
A growing telecommunications industry requires a dynamic regulatory framework, which
ensures customer satisfaction, good return on investment and adequate participation of
Ghanaians in the sector.
To this end in August 2014 Cabinet approved four policies: The Mobile Virtual Network
Operating License; The Interconnect Clearing House License, The International Wholesale
Carrier License and the Unified Telecom License. It is expected that unimpeded
implementation of these policies will inure to the benefit of all stakeholders.
GIRLS IN ICT

Mr. Speaker,
I want more females to venture into the ICT and Telecommunication sector. Ms. Farida
Bedwei’s service to the nation on the Board of the National Communications Authority
serves as encouragement to many girls who are thinking of venturing into ICT and
Telecommunications. Farida, who is also with us this morning, I am informed, has
distinguished herself creditably.
To encourage more girls to develop interest in ICT and Telecommunications, Ghana has
been observing the Girls in ICT Day. As part of the celebration of the day, girls from public
schools are brought together, tutored and mentored to develop interest in the study and use
of ICTs. Madam Eva Lokko and her team are championing this initiative with the support of
the Ministry of Communications.
Last year 411 girls from 48 public schools participated in the programme in the Eastern
Region. These promising young girls were trained using the Community Information Centres
being constructed across the country.

Mr. Speaker,
In furtherance of the commitment of Government to use the medium of ICT to promote an
all-inclusive information and knowledge society to benefit underserved and un-served
communities, Government continued to promote the Community Information Centre
concept.
In 2014 utilizing part of the savings from a Value-for-Money Audit of the e-Government
Platform Project, we commenced the construction of 20 enhanced Community Information
Centres in all the ten regions.
The centres are located in Keta, Battor, Techiman Krobo, Twifo Atti-Morkwa, Bodi, Effiduase,
Glefe, Pantang Presby Cluster of Schools, Drobonso, Asuogyaman, Lambussie, Nandom,
Welembelle, Sagnarigu, Pusiga, Nalerigu, Kpetoe, Talensi, Ofoase, Lassia-Tuolu. Ten (10) of
these have been completed and ready for commissioning.

31
TRANSPARENT & ACCOUNTABLE GOVERNANCE
Mr. Speaker,
Good governance, transparency and the fight against corruption form an integral part of the
Agenda for Transformation. The country’s progress in this area has been commendable.
Ghana ranks high in all major governance indicators, human rights, transparency and rule of
law assessments. We have a vibrant civil society and media, which operate in a very free and
open environment.
Mr. Speaker,
I have remained resolute to the key principles of good governance as enshrined in our
Constitution because it is the right thing to do. Indeed, citizen involvement and participation
in the development process are important ingredients in realizing our development
aspirations.
I will continue to engage our people through regular interaction with our chiefs, workers,
religious leaders, farmers, students, the business community, market women and all other
sections of the populace. In the last year, our engagement and interaction with the citizenry
was enhanced with the introduction of the Government for the People (G4P) forums.
The G4P forum provided a good platform for government to explain the benefits of our
policies, and offer the people an opportunity to give feedback. We must make every effort to
sustain the achievements we have made over the years in promoting good governance,
enhancing accountability and combating corruption.
DECENTRALIZATION AND LOCAL GOVERNANCE
Mr. Speaker,
Ghana has made significant progress towards achieving full decentralization, despite the
challenges with fiscal decentralization. Last year, the internally generated funds of
Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs) increased as a result of the
different programmes in place to achieve full fiscal decentralization.
My resolve to address the sanitation challenge facing us has led to the creation of a
comprehensive environmental sanitation programme, which has three components–
National Sanitation Day, Composting and Recycling and Waste Separation.
So far we have successfully marked a number of National Sanitation Days aimed at
mobilizing all of us to clean our environments. Currently, the National Service Scheme is
supporting the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development by deploying trained
national service personnel to gather data on household disposal to serve as a basis for
distribution of waste bins to households that currently have none.
The primary objective of these collaborative efforts is to arrest waste at the point of
production and minimize our current environmental sanitation challenges. Ultimately, the 

32
national sanitation day initiative must be augmented with behavioural change, proper waste
disposal and waste management systems. Let us all commit to this.
DISTRICT ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS

Mr. Speaker,
District Assembly elections are scheduled to take place next week. It is yet again an
illustration of how far we have come as a nation in our quest to build an open, democratic,
tolerant and responsible society. Permit me to urge all Ghanaians to return to their
respective polling stations to exercise their rights to choose the people they want to
represent them in the local governance decision-making process.
Mr. Speaker,
This is the final major election to be undertaken by the Electoral Commission under the
leadership of Dr. Kwadwo Afari Djan before he attains his statutory retirement age. There
certainly will be an opportunity for a grateful nation to express its gratitude to an illustrious
son of the land, who has led a team of dedicated, and hardworking men and women over
the last 23 years to guide our nation in one of the most delicate aspects of modern
democracy- elections.
As President of the Republic, let me on behalf of the people of Ghana express our respect
for the dedication to work shown by Dr. Afari Djan. I have no doubt that his place in Ghana’s
history is assured and he will be dearly missed when he finally retires this year.

PARLIAMENT

Mr. Speaker,
May I take this opportunity to congratulate the Parliament of the Republic of Ghana for the
manner you went about your work in the last year and for your collaboration with the
executive in exercising oversight. The chamber has been reconfigured and equipped with
modern communication gadgets to adequately accommodate all 275 MPs for the efficient
and effective discharge of your legislative functions.
Mr. Speaker,
I am happy to note that finally, Members of Parliament are sure of their office
accommodation. The long awaited Job 600 building is almost ready for occupation by MPs.
We will this year start work on the e-Parliament component of the US$97million e-Transform
Ghana project. This allows for a paperless flow of information and will enhance the
operations and activities of the House. I am particularly excited about the prospects of an
improved citizen participation in governance under the e-Parliament project.
Mr. Speaker,
May I also commend you in particular and Honourable members for working to review the
standing orders of the House to improve and ensure increased efficiency of the House in
performing your legislative functions. You are responding to changing trends of legislative
practice and procedures.

 

33

ENHANCING RULE OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Mr. Speaker,
We remain committed to a free and independent Judiciary and we continue to support
measures aimed at ensuring efficient and speedy administration of justice. The new court
complex that will house 34 courts initiated by our late President Prof. John Atta Mills is
nearing completion. Government has also provided three video-conferencing and telepresence
equipment to enable the Judicial Service conduct face-to-face interaction with
judges in Accra, Kumasi and Takoradi.
In the next 18 months we will disburse US$5million for the e-Justice project with the sole
objective of assisting in the speedy and efficient delivery of justice. This project also covers
the Attorney General’s Department.
COMBATING CORRUPTION
Mr. Speaker,
Corruption is a canker that continues to plague our society. Former President Kufuor once
said, “Government pretends to pay workers, and workers pretend to work”. This statement
was made at a time public sector pay was abysmal.
It is obvious at the time that many public sector workers made up their paltry incomes by
taking illegal “tips’ and “charges” from members of the public. With the significant
improvement in salaries occasioned by the SSSS, there can be no justification for the
continued bribes demanded from members of the public before they access social services,
or the wanton misappropriation and theft of public resources.
In every facet of life we encounter corruption, at the ports when business people under
declare the value of goods to avoid paying the right duties to the state, draining fuel from
Government vehicles, some officers taking bribes from motorists for traffic infractions, and I
could go on with several other examples.
Yet at every level there are responsible officers who are to exercise oversight of the activities
in the various Ministries, Departments and Agencies. If these were our private businesses we
surely would not accept the conduct that we see exhibited in the public service and that are
continuously exposed in the reports of the Auditor General on an annual basis.
Ghana is bleeding from all of these acts of mismanagement and malfeasance and leadership
at all levels should take responsibility for their areas of oversight and will be made to do so.
We must all support the fight against corruption.
Recently there are reports of a spate of suspicious fires that have gutted records or
warehouses that were subjected to audit or about to be subjected to audit. Our directors,
inspectors and all heads of institutions must sit up.

 

34
Mr. Speaker,
Parliament in July 2014 adopted the National Anti-corruption Action Plan and Strategy. It is
the overarching plan to combat corruption in the country and must be implemented.
In December 2014, I established a High Level Implementation Committee to be responsible
for the implementation of NACAP. This High Level Committee will provide strategic policy
guidance from the highest level of government to MDAs and other implementing partners as
well as assist CHRAJ and the NDPC in monitoring the implementation of NACAP.
The process of investigation and prosecution of allegations of corruption, economic crimes
and mismanagement by the EOCO and the AG’s Department have been subject to delay
and have been unable to fulfill their mandate.
The institutions of State that are responsible for the task of investigating corruption must be
strengthened legally and institutionally and I would like to invite Parliament to review the
legal and institutional framework that supports the work of the investigative and
prosecutorial agencies in order to enable them to live up to the expectations of an expectant
and exasperated nation.
I have as President made strenuous efforts to expose, investigate and deal with matters of
corruption within the constraints of the law. Our efforts at exposing corruption may result in
an erroneous belief that the practice is more pervasive now than before when infact the
reverse is the case as evidenced in our performance in recent TI reports.
Let me take the opportunity again to urge all anti-graft institutions to promptly investigate
allegations and take swift actions to protect the public purse. As President, I will continue to
lend every support to these important institutions to ensure total victory in the war against
malfeasance. As we play our part, I urge other arms of Government to support me to make
corruption a high-risk activity.
Mr. Speaker,
Let us make our institutions work and let us work together to create the framework to deal
with this menace swiftly, impartially and fairly.
While we expose and fight corruption we also tighten systems to ensure that existing
loopholes are sealed to avoid a recurrence. One major way to achieve this is with the use of
information technology. There has been strong resistance in many instances in our roll out of
technology in MDAs because many prefer the laxness of the manual system. We will invest
and speed up technology uptake in all facets of national life.
Mr. Speaker,
Last year I authorized the BNI to conduct investigations into allegations of fraud in the
National Service Schemes pay roll. The investigations revealed an organized system of
misappropriating government funds through the insertion of ghost service personnel.
Investigators have so far retrieved over GH¢20 million.
In addition some officials of the service are currently before court. 

35
The NSS following the pay-roll scandal also put in a new electronic pay roll for all national
service personnel enabling their payments to be loaded on their E-Zwich cards. This will help
to eliminate ghosts in the NSS pay roll. Government has through this already saved an
estimated GH¢26.5 million.
Prosecution of public officials involved in the Ghana Youth Employment and Entrepreneurial
Development Authority (GYEEDA) is ongoing and monies are being retrieved from the
service providers. A new YEA to replace GYEEDA has just been approved by Parliament.
All the checks and controls for proper accountability would be used to ensure that the youth
of Ghana benefit fully from this all-important project. Major steps have also been taken to
bring SADA back on course. A new Board was reconstituted and an acting CEO appointed.
Significant progress is being made in terms of reforms in many areas of SADA’s operations in
line with its core mandate.
Mr. Speaker,
Government will continue to strengthen the integration of the Ghana Integrated and
Financial Management Information System (GIFMIS) with the Human Resource and
Management Information System (HRMIS) to eliminate institutional weaknesses, which allow
criminal elements to perpetrate pay roll fraud. The Judgment Debt Commission and the
Brazil 2014 Commission of Inquiry have concluded their work and the reports are due soon.
Upon receipt of the reports Government will study them and take the necessary and
appropriate actions.
Mr. Speaker
A number of Bills laid before this House in 2014, i.e. the Conduct of Public Officers’ Bill; the
Whistle Blowers (Amendment) Bill and the Right to Information Bill, when enacted into law,
will significantly deal with the identified gaps and I look forward to these Bills being passed
into law by this house as soon as possible.
The Minister for Justice and Attorney General would also ensure that the Witness Protection
Bill and a Criminal Offences (Amendment) Bill are laid before the House. These bills, I
believe, will adequately deal with illicit enrichment and trading in influence that were also
identified as lacking in our criminal legislation.
FOREIGN RELATIONS

Mr. Speaker,
As Chair of the Authority of ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, I have worked to give
meaning to the implementation of our foreign policy of seeking to create a more integrated
West Africa Sub-Region where our economic development is enhanced by promoting our
economic integration.
During the last year, we finalized the Common External Tariff for the ECOWAS region, an
important step in the establishment of a Customs Union, which will be implemented in our
member states in the course of this year.

36
We stood in solidarity with our brothers and sisters in Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia and
provided the coordination Centre for the United Nations Mission on Ebola Emergency
Response (UNMEER).
We continue to provide peacekeeping support and are working with ECOWAS to
consolidate peace and democracy in Mali. We have also sent a battalion of officers to South
Sudan to help return Africa’s youngest nation to peace and allow for the re-establishment of
an effective Government.
Ghana will also continue to work within the multilateral international arena to join other
nations of the world in fashioning out the successor to the millennium development goals.
We will also work with ECOWAS and our neighbor Burkina Faso to facilitate a peaceful
transition to culminate in free and fair election later this year.
We shall work together with our partners in the region to ensure safety and security. In doing
so we acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, that our neighbours- Togo, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Cote
D’Ivoire and Guinea- are preparing for crucial elections.
I urge the Governments and People of these countries to take all the necessary measures to
reach understanding between all the political interest groups on important issues relating to
the preparation, organization and conduct of the elections.
Ghana also stands in solidarity with Nigeria and the Lake Chad Basin Countries in their fight
against the Boko Haram terrorist group.
Mr. Speaker,
The initial delays in the response to the Ebola Virus Disease outbreak in West Africa exposed
some deep-seated weaknesses in International Crisis Management. There were needless
mortalities and morbidities.
Accordingly, I have accepted and joined German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Norwegian
Prime Minister Erna Solberg to propose to the United Nations the setting up of a high-level
panel of renowned personalities and the commissioning of a report on how to strengthen
the International Crisis Management system, particularly in health.
We have based our proposal on the lessons we are learning from the Ebola epidemic, and
believe that the UN Secretary General’s Panel may also consider mechanisms for information
sharing at the outset of any national crisis so that there is the opportunity for a faster and
more coordinated response.


SECURITY AGENCIES
Mr. Speaker,
Over the last few years, Government has intensified efforts at positioning the country’s
security agencies to adequately respond to the contemporary security challenges.
Government has done this through the biggest retooling of the agencies in recent Ghanaian
history. 

37
Mr. Speaker, currently the numerical strength of the Police Service has moved from twentythree
thousand, two hundred and four (23,204) in 2012 to thirty thousand, six hundred and
thirty-five (30,635) in 2014. This has resulted in a current Police-Population ratio of 1:784 as
against 1:1,100 in 2010. This has brought us closer to the United Nations’ benchmark of
1:500. It has also led to an increase in police visibility and accessibility, which are key
prerequisites in crime prevention, detection and control.
Consequently our crime statistics dropped by over five thousand (5,000) cases between 2010
and 2014. This downward trend is expected to continue in this year and beyond. The Police
needs our support and collaboration in making our cities, villages, and places of work safer
and more peaceful.
Mr. Speaker,
For the first time in Ghana’s history a Marine Police Unit has been established and equipped
with modern speedboats to police the country’s territorial waters. In addition, a number of
critical logistics such as bulletproof vests and riot control gear have been procured for the
Police Service.
The Ghana National Fire Service received 85 more fire tenders in 2014. The operations of the
Border Patrol Unit (BPU) of Ghana Immigration Service have been enhanced through the
installation of border Surveillance Systems (CCTV and WIFI Systems) at 15 out of 17
strategically selected Border Control Points throughout the country.
Safety and security are key planks in my Agenda for Transformation and will continue to
receive my utmost attention
Mr. Speaker,
As Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, I wish to use this occasion to commend the
Service Commanders, Officers and Men of the Armed Forces for their valour and dedication
to duty in the defence of the territorial integrity of our dear country.
I also commend them for their humanitarian service through Peacekeeping missions and
specifically the unique role they played together with other security agencies to facilitate the
establishment of the United Nations Mission on the Ebola Emergency Response.
We will continue the programme of retooling and reequipping the armed forces with the
appropriate instruments and platforms to enable them carry out their constitutional
mandate. In this regard, vehicles, helicopters, aircrafts, armoured personnel carriers, and
other ordinance are being procured to enhance the capacity of the forces both internally and
externally.



Mr. Speaker,
In fulfillment of the NDC’s 2012 manifesto promise to strengthen the fight against narcotics, I
have assigned a seasoned investigator and principled intelligence chief, William K. Aboah, 

38
the task of restructuring the Narcotics Control Board into a Commission. He will also assume
the Chairmanship of the Commission when the Board is constituted.
RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE

Mr. Speaker,
Ghana has enjoyed a long history of religious tolerance. From the period of the TransSaharan
trade, the 2 major world religions and African traditional religion have coexisted
peacefully in this land.
Our constitution in Article 21, Clause 1, guarantees the freedom of religion and the freedom
to express one’s religious beliefs. That is why recent complaints about religious
discrimination coming from Muslim Groups in the Western Region and the Christian Council
of Ghana are worrying.
It is wrong under our constitution for Muslim students to be compelled to attend church
services or for Christian students to be compelled to attend Muslim congregational prayers.
It is also wrong to prevent Muslim women from wearing the ‘hijab’ or Nuns from wearing
their habits to work or to school. Heads of institution must note this for strict compliance.
Appropriate sanctions would be taken against any head of institution who act contrary to the
constitutional provisions.
POLITICAL RELATIONS
Mr. Speaker,
To enhance rapprochement and political harmony, I will continue to dialogue and build
bridges with the leadership and membership of other political parties.
I have received a petition from the Council of Elders of the CPP asking for a return of
properties seized from the party after the 1966 coup. I have referred the petition to the AG
for consideration and advice.
CONCLUSION
Mr. Speaker,
Eight days from now, we will be marking our 58th anniversary as a free and independent
country. Even as we celebrate this occasion and reflect on the struggles waged by our
illustrious forbears to wean us off colonial domination and subjugation, there is now more
than ever before, the need for an honest assessment of our own contributions towards the
sustenance and development of our dear nation- Ghana.

Mr. Speaker,
Recently we have been offered a stern test of our resolve and commitment to the course of
our nation. Our response to this test is mirrored by the story of our aptly named national
football team, the Black Stars, in the last year.

39
The Black Stars of Ghana after several failed attempts at qualifying for the World Cup, finally
managed to do so in 2006 and put up a creditable performance to the admiration of the
world. This brought immeasurable joy to an adoring nation. Four years later at the same
tournament in South Africa, the Black Stars turned on the style and only missed out on a
historic semi-final berth through the cruelest of circumstances.
This performance cemented our place as one of the most potent forces not only in African
football but also on the world stage. It instilled in us a deep sense of National pride and we
doted on the team.
Mr. Speaker,
Based on this impressive record, expectations were high that a third straight appearance at
the World Cup in Brazil will bring even greater laurels to the nation especially at a time when
our team had some of the most established players in the game.
Through a chain of events with which we are all very familiar, the Black Stars crushed out of
that tournament in the most unexpected manner. The deep hurt and disappointment that
greeted their unceremonious exit from the competition was to usher in a most regrettable
phase in the relationship between the team and its once adoring fan, the Ghanaian.
Suddenly the high spirits that greeted every appearance of the Black Stars in a match was
replaced with extreme skepticism and doubt. Hope turned into despair and vociferous
support was supplanted by open hostility. The Black Stars therefore cut the image of forlone
orphans, abandoned by all and left to their fate.
For the first time in many years their participation in an international competition like the just
ended African Cup of Nations was met with disinterest and a near total absence of support.
There were widespread predictions of an early exit for the team from the tournament on
account of the very tough opponents that they had been grouped with. The loss of their first
match further strengthened this notion among large sections of our people.
Mr. Speaker,
The Black Stars in their next match were however to demonstrate in dramatic fashion, the
fabled resilience of the Ghanaian. With virtually the last kick of the game, our national team,
led by Captain Asamoah Gyan, snatched survival in the tournament from the jaws of
elimination.
They were then to move on and play some breath-taking football to beat all their next three
opponents to qualify for the final of a tournament in which their own compatriots had written
them off. Of course they lost to a formidable Ivorian side in the final but only the most
eternal pessimist will doubt the quality of the performance they put up in that game before
missing out on the trophy through the lottery of penalty kicks.
Perhaps the Ghana Football Association (GFA) has not adopted the full prescriptions of His
Excellency Professor John Evans Atta Mills of blessed memory when he used an occasion of
the State of the Nation address to speak to the issue of penalty taking in football. 

40
Mr. Speaker,
I have recounted the story of the Black Stars because it provides a vivid illustration yet of our
story as a people. We have won laurels before and we can win more. We have a buoyant,
smart and energetic youth.
We were birthed as a nation after centuries of spirited struggle by past generations. They
handed down to this present generation a nation with enormous potential, which had come
to represent the beacon of hope for many nations who were held down by the yoke of
colonial domination.
Like every great nation we have been through rough patches in our history. We have been
through periods of political and serious economic instability. We have made mistakes and
some wrong choices in the management of our affairs over the years.
Mr. Speaker,
We have at many points in our history emerged stronger from adversity. We are now an
established and respected democracy after coming from prolonged periods of
experimentation. This is what I mean when I say we have victory in our DNA. Our quest to
build a prosperous, inclusive, free and just society is very much on course in spite of the
temporary setbacks of erratic electricity supply and slippages on the macro-economic front.
Even as these challenges are tackled head on, there is compelling evidence of
unquestionable progress made in almost all aspects of our national life. Today there are
more of our children enrolled in school than ever before as a direct result of unprecedented
opportunities made available to them. More girls are being kept in the classrooms. More
women are holding responsible and sensitive positions in our country.
Today Ghanaians are more likely to receive better healthcare services than ever before
because of significant investment and work done in the sector.
Today we have succeeded in moving more of our citizens out of poverty and reduced hunger
and malnutrition.
Today we have increased life expectancy over the 58 years of our nation’s life from 45 years
to 63 years.
Today millions of our compatriots who had to endure shortages of potable water have
access to the vital commodity leading to the eradication of the Guinea worm disease in
Ghana.
Today we have adopted more than ever, the use of ICT and Telecommunication as a driver
and a catalyst in our daily activities.
Our roads continue to be improved. Some of the remotest parts of our country have been
given access to electricity making the rate of access to electricity one of the highest on the
continent. Many other human development indicators are showing significant improvements
in the lives of our people.

41
What is required to sustain this momentum and to propel us to greater heights is a renewed
commitment to the progress and wellbeing of our nation. Nation building is a long and
arduous task, which can only be undertaken through collective effort.
This effort must be anchored in unconditional love for our country, hard work- I repeat hard
work and an immutable sense of patriotism. This is the path treaded by those who before us,
through sheer valor and sacrifice, sweat and blood, toiled to secure our nation 58 years ago.
With patriotic zeal and a burning desire to ensure the progress and prosperity of our country
there will be no obstacle too lofty to surmount. No nation has attained greatness without
these values.
The greatest impediments in the way of patriotism and collective nation building however
are unbridled cynicism and excessive partisanship- two creeping phenomena, which we must
guard against and expunge from our psyche.
A cynical approach often leads to a craving for every national endeavour to end in failure in
order to justify a deeply flawed perspective on national affairs. It latches onto temporary
problems to paint a picture of abject hopelessness. A partisan approach places premium on
political calculation and gain above what should be the national interest.
On the airwaves, on a daily basis, we hear polarized views on critical national issues from
people from all walks of life including those who should be sharing academic and
professional perspectives with the general public. Unprintable expressions are sometimes
allowed without caution or censorship, misuse of the Internet inclusive. A conscious effort is
thus made to either exaggerate or distort the true picture that should emerge of our nation.
We must not allow ourselves to be sucked into the vortex of cynicsm and extreme
partisanship. Like the Black Stars, let us fashion out of the jagged rocks of fleeting setbacks,
smooth stepping-stones to greater laurels.
Mr. Speaker,
I will add, that in our case, let us score our goals to secure victory. Our history is replete with
glorious tales of remarkable victories and successes. These must spur us on to achieve even
far more than we can imagine.
So on this auspicious occasion as I end my third state of the nation address and as we
commence festivities to mark our independence, I invite everyone, boy or girl, man or
woman, rich or poor, religious believer or non-believer to shed off what divides us,
concentrate on the many issues that unite us as a nation and let’s work together to
accelerate the progress made so far as we work to transform Ghana.
We owe it to our forebears whose toil and sacrifice led to the victory over those who sought
to oppress us and keep us from realizing our destiny as a great nation and laid down the
building blocks for the progress we have made so far.
We owe it to our forebears, once again, to keep the unity and cohesion of our country.
Together we will build a strong and prosperous Ghana. I urge families and educational 

42
institutions to continue to inculcate a sense of unity, patriotism and nationalism in our
people. Destiny brought us together as one nation. Our ethnic and cultural diversity is a
source of strength not a weakness. We must reject any attempt to sow any strife and discord
among us.
We owe it to ourselves as heirs of a generation that did this for us and perhaps even more
importantly we owe it to our children and our children’s children who deserve to live in a fully
developed, prosperous, free and just society.
I thank you Mr. Speaker.
God bless our homeland Ghana.
 