1
MESSAGE ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY THE PRESIDENT OF
THE REPUBLIC, NANA ADDO DANKWA AKUFO-ADDO, ON THE
OCCASION OF THE STATE OPENING OF PARLIAMENT ON TUESDAY,
FEBRUARY 21, 2017.
Mr. Speaker,
It is good to be back here again in this Chamber, where I spent some 12
memorable years as a Member of Parliament. I recollect with nostalgia the
vigorous debates of my days here as a Minority MP, and I have very fond
memories of being on the Majority side also.
I can see some old faces from my first days here – like the 2nd Deputy
Speaker, Hon. Alban Bagbin, whom I came to meet in the House in 1997, and
who became a good friend of mine; and Hon Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu, the
Majority Leader, with whom I entered Parliament on the same side, at the
same time.
On December 7th, 2016, the Ghanaian people went to the polls, and voted
decisively for change. As a result, today, I am here again in this House, this
time as President of the Republic, having secured an emphatic, electoral
victory.
Mr. Speaker, we have to thank God for His Grace and Favour for a peaceful
and smooth transfer of power, in which Ghanaians rose to the occasion, and
made our nation the object of world admiration. The Ghanaian people are to
be commended for their strong attachment to the principles of democratic
accountability.
I would like to take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to express my sincere
appreciation to my predecessor, President John Mahama, for his leadership
and his role in the transition. His conduct has been a credit to our nation.
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to see the presence in this House of two other
former Presidents of the Republic, their Excellencies Jerry John Rawlings and
John Agyekum Kufuor. I am in the enviable position of being the first
Ghanaian leader to be able to draw on the experiences of three living, former
Presidents. This should, definitely, enrich my tenure of office.
Mr Speaker, I congratulate you on your unanimous election to preside over
the affairs of this House. It is a fitting acknowledgement of your distinguished
service to our nation. I congratulate also your deputies on their appointments,
the 1st Deputy Speaker, a respected member of the House, Hon. Joe Osei
Wusu, and 2nd Deputy Speaker, the veteran legislator, Hon. Alban Bagbin. I
commend also the Majority Leader, my contemporary in this House, who can 
2
now put his extensive experience of Parliament to use as Leader of the House
and Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. My compliments go, too, to the new
Minority Leader, Hon. Haruna Iddrisu, who announced himself on the national
stage when he came here in my last term in the House. It is clear that he has
an important future in Ghanaian politics. I want to assure him and the
leadership of the House, on both sides, that I will co-operate fully with
Parliament to enhance the governance of our nation to be able to do the
business of Ghana effectively.
Mr. Speaker, I use this occasion to commend the Electoral Commission and its
Chairperson, Charlotte Osei, for the conduct of our recent elections, which has
received domestic and international acclaim. In the coming years, I hope that
our electoral processes will become even more robust, so that free and fair
elections become automatic parts of our democratic culture.
Mr. Speaker, certain incidents occurred during the transition period that are
matters of concern to me, and should be to every Ghanaian, as they marred
an otherwise dignified and successful transition. Wrongdoing has no political
colour, and I do not subscribe to the lawlessness of political party supporters
simply because their party has been elected into office.
Mr. Speaker, when those incidents began, I instructed the then Inspector
General of Police, John Kudalor, to apply the law, irrespective of political
affiliation, to all lawbreakers. This instruction was also carried on to his
successor, David Asante Appeatu. Both of them acted upon it, which helped to
bring the situation under control.
It appears these events were predicated on some concept of equalisation, as
they happened in 2009, and were repeated again in 2017. I condemn all such
conduct, and I call on all political parties, especially the New Patriotic Party
and the National Democratic Congress, to ensure that this is the last time
such undignified acts occur during our periods of transition.
Mr. Speaker, I come before you, today, in fulfilment of the constitutional
obligation that the President of the Republic gives a message to Parliament on
the state of the nation at the beginning of Parliament’s session.
Since my inauguration some six weeks ago as president of our country, I have
set to work, putting into place the members of the team who will help me
govern.
I have heard it said that I am behaving like a man in a hurry. Mr. Speaker, I
am, indeed, in a hurry, I am in a great hurry. The times, in which we live,
demand that we, all, be in a hurry to deal with the problems we face.
3
I am grateful, therefore, to the Honourable House for the expeditious manner
in which my ministerial nominees have been vetted and approved, thus far. I
look forward to the House dealing with the rest of the nominees I send, in an
equally fast and efficient manner.
Now that the processes for the composition of the Council of State have been
completed, I shall inaugurate the Council this week, which will enable me to
proceed rapidly with the appointments that need to be done in consultation
with the Council. The full complement of appointments should be in place by
the end of March.
Mr. Speaker, the conditions in our country demand that government
machinery functions efficiently and at full force, and that nothing is left on
autopilot. The conditions demand that all of us, each and every one of us,
tackle every task before us with speed and dedication.
Mr Speaker, to give a fair account of the state of our nation, I have to give an
account of the state of our economy, of our governance and of our national
culture and attitudes. This account will highlight some of the fundamental
elements of the situation, and will not pretend to be a detailed, sectoral
analysis of our condition. I leave that to the budget statement, to be delivered
in ten days time.
Mr. Speaker, I say nothing new or dramatic, when I tell this Honourable
House that the economy of our country is in a bad way. After all, in the runup
to the recent elections, I said so, often and loudly. Some six weeks after
taking over the reins of government, it gives me no pleasure to have to say
that our worst fears have been confirmed, plus a few additional, unpleasant
surprises as well.
Mr Speaker, many get quite lost when economists start rattling figures and
statistics. I will try not to bore you with a lot of figures, but I hope you will
bear with me as I have to put certain essential facts before our country.
You would recall that, notwithstanding the fact that the previous government
had more than ten times the financial resources than any other government
since independence, its management of our economy in the run up to the
2012 presidential and parliamentary elections resulted in a quagmire that
necessitated the urgent intervention of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
in 2014. The IMF programme negotiated was ostensibly to restore fiscal
discipline, debt sustainability and increase economic growth. The previous
government promised Ghanaians that the reckless public expenditure that
characterized the 2012 election year would not be repeated in 2016.
Mr. Speaker, the promises to the Ghanaian people were, however, not kept.
In fact, virtually all the targets under the IMF programme, as at December
2016, have been missed. Fiscal indiscipline, once again, reared its head in the 
4
2016 election year. Total projected expenditure for 2016 was GH¢43.9 billion
(26% of GDP), but actual expenditure amounted to GH¢50.3 billion (30.2% of
GDP). The full facts of the situation have not been put before the Ghanaian
people. It appears, from what we are finding out, that some GH¢7 billion of
arrears and outstanding payments circumvented the very public financial
management system that was put in place to prevent such occurrences.
These expenditures are being currently audited.
Mr. Speaker, at the same time, revenue performance for the year was poor.
The total revenue target for our country was GH¢37.9 billion (22.7% of GDP),
but the actual revenue came in at GH¢33.2 billion (19.9% of GDP).
Mr. Speaker, the combination of higher expenditures and lower revenues than
projected resulted in a significant increase in the budget deficit for 2016. As
compared to a target of 5.3% under the IMF programme, the fiscal deficit for
2016 was 9% of GDP on a cash basis and 10.2% of GDP on a commitment
basis (that is on the basis of expenditures undertaken but not yet paid for). It
should be recalled that, at the time Ghana entered into the IMF programme to
restore fiscal discipline, the fiscal deficit was 10.2% of GDP. It is very clear,
therefore, that the objectives set out in the programme have not been
achieved.
Mr. Speaker, the increasing fiscal deficits were financed by increased
borrowing. As at the beginning of 2009, Ghana’s total debt stock was GH¢9.5
billion. By the end of 2016, the debt stock had ballooned to GH¢122 billion.
Ghana’s debt stock now stands at 74% of GDP, after all the previous denials
to the contrary. More debt was accumulated by the previous government in
the last eight years than all other governments put together since
independence! In fact, 92% of Ghana’s total debt stock was incurred in the
last eight years under the previous government. The interest costs on this
debt have also increased and will amount to an estimated GH¢14.1 billion in
2017.
Mr. Speaker, the reality of the state Ghana’s public finances today are quite
stark. Today, as a result of policy choices, we find ourselves in a situation
where Ghana’s total revenue is consumed by three main budgetary lines:
wages and salaries, interest payments and amortization and statutory
payments. These three items alone account for 99.6% of government
revenue. This means that anything else that government has to do outside of
these lines will have to be financed by borrowing or aid. After eight years of
the previous government, there is practically no fiscal space left. The
persistent resort to borrowing for any additional expenditures to meet the
aspirations of our people is also not sustainable. We cannot continue this way
with our public finances. I will not allow this economy to collapse under my
watch. We will reduce significantly the fiscal deficit this year.
5
Mr. Speaker, Ghana’s economic growth has also declined dramatically.
Notwithstanding the record amount of financial resources at the disposal of
the previous government, Ghana’s GDP growth in 2016 (including oil) is
estimated at 3.6%. This is the lowest GDP growth in about 23 years.
Mr. Speaker, Ghana’s banking sector has not escaped the economic decline
and has become increasingly fragile. Bad loans in the banking sector have
risen significantly. Economic and Financial data from the Central Bank show
that non-performing loans have risen sharply from 11.2% in May 2015 to
17.3% in December 2016. The recent Asset Quality Review of Banks shows
significant vulnerability of banks to current economic conditions, with many
exhibiting significant weaknesses.
Mr. Speaker, low growth, rising rate of unemployment, high fiscal deficits,
high and rising debt, and increased depreciation of the cedi, high cost of food,
housing and utilities and high non-performing loans, amongst others, are
symptoms of deeper structural problems that will require a range of reforms,
beginning immediately and spanning the short, medium and long terms. We
are going to have to implement some tough, prudent and innovative policies
to get out of this financial cul-de sac and rescue this economy, restore fiscal
discipline and debt sustainability as well as increase economic growth.
Mr. Speaker, it gives me no joy to tell the story of the economy as it is - as we
inherited it. Too much time, energy and resources were spent in the past, in
my view, without a deliberate, conscious assessment of their impact on jobs,
and whether or not we were spending wisely to improve the lives of the
people, communities and businesses. But, I was not elected by the
overwhelming majority of the Ghanaian people to complain. I was elected to
get things done. I was elected to fix what is broken and my government and I
are determined to do just that. At the beginning of March, the Minister for
Finance will come to this House to lay out in the national budget the details of
our economic policy and the clear roadmap that we have laid out for taking
the country out of its current predicament and onto a sustainable path of
recovery, jobs creation and prosperity. I am absolute in my confidence that
we have the programme, the competence, the commitment, and the goodwill
of the people to turn things around. By the Grace of God, we will succeed and
I believe this House knows it too.
In the immediate term, targeted legislative policy and institutional reforms will
have to be undertaken to unleash the suppressed potential of the economy
and allow Ghanaian entrepreneurship to rise and thrive, domestically and
internationally.
6
For too many young people, unemployment is sadly the reality of the start to
their adult life. For years, for generations, it was assumed and guaranteed in
this country that the quality of life of every generation would be an
improvement on that of their parents. We are now faced with the
phenomenon of parents looking on in frustration as their grown-up children
remain at home, without the means to strike an independent life by
themselves.
This generation of Ghanaians dares not be the one to reverse this natural
trend. We must create the atmosphere that generates jobs. We must boost
the confidence of the private sector to invest in the economy.
We must have the courage to start building our future and take the hard
decisions that need to be taken to grow our economy. We have no choice but
to reduce the budget deficit and cut waste in all sectors of public life. We
must complete the formalisation of the economy. The process for a
comprehensive national identification system and a property titling system will
be completed this year. That will boost confidence in our country and increase
investment from nationals and foreigners. Then we will be able to generate
jobs.
We must boost the confidence of the private sector to invest in the economy.
Mr. Speaker, I believe the starting point in turning round our fortunes must be
with agriculture. Unfortunately, the state of agriculture in our country right
now is not good. Farmers are left on their own. It is not surprising, therefore,
that food prices are high and we are having to import almost everything we
eat, including vegetables from our Sahelian neighbours. And yet, agriculture
provides the best opportunity to use modern methods to change the lives of
many, within the shortest possible time.
We have to irrigate our lands and equip farmers with the skills needed to
make farming a well-paying business. We aim to popularize farming by
encouraging many people to take it up as a full or part time activity. A
National Campaign, “PLANTING FOR FOOD AND JOBS”, will be launched
to stimulate this activity. An amount of 125 million Canadian dollars has been
secured from Canada, a friend of our nation, to support the initiative.
This Campaign will be anchored on the pillars that will transform agriculture:
the provision of improved seeds, the supply of fertilizers, the provision of
dedicated extension services, a marketing strategy and the use of eAgriculture.
To initiate the Campaign, the District Assemblies will be tasked to identify and
register progressive farmers in each of the 216 districts. 
7
Mr Speaker, for too long our farmers have been left to cope by themselves,
without the necessary support from government. For too long, our farmers
have been left to the mercy of the vagaries of the weather.
We have decided to embark upon a programme to provide water to enable
all-year farming. We are calling it the one-village, one-dam policy. It is a
programme that I expect will rapidly get the support of the population, and
should help to transform food insecurity in our country.
The three northern regions, in particular, will benefit from the availability of
water to enable all-year farming, so that the enforced yearly migration can be
minimized and food production become more predictable.
I look forward to an increase in public investment in agriculture, starting from
the first budget of my government. We must reverse the unfortunate trend of
the past eight years, which saw a regular decrease in public investment in the
sector that provides a living for the majority of our people.
Mr Speaker, food processing has been the first step towards industrialization
in virtually every country, and it is time for us to take it seriously. Not only will
it serve to cut down on the wastage of crops during the high season, it will
provide more jobs and expand farming business. Food processing will also
save time in the preparation and cooking of our local foods, and there will be
better control on the hygiene in the process. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to an
exciting time in the agricultural sector.
Mr. Speaker, if I were to ask each one of you in this Chamber, today, to tell
me what the number one problem was in your constituency, I suspect there
would be a uniform answer: JOBS.
The most critical challenge, inherited by this NPP government, is the very
high, unprecedented level of unemployment, particularly among the youth. It
is a debilitating and confidence-sapping problem that affects every home. We
can argue on what the official rate of unemployment is, but we can all see the
desperation of our young people. They want to work, but there are no jobs
and some of them are being driven to unacceptable behaviour. We have a
veritable time bomb on our hands.
To address this challenge, the government is embarking on one of the most
comprehensive programmes for industrial transformation ever to be
introduced in our country.
The key elements of this programme are:
1. restoration and maintenance of a stable macro-economy
8
2. monetary and fiscal measures which will lead to a reduction in interest
rates and a reduction in the tax burden on enterprises
3. provision of reliable, affordable power to enterprises and homes
4. setting up of a stimulus package to support existing Ghanaian industries
and improve their competitiveness
5. implementation of the initiative, through public-private partnerships, to
establish at least one industrial enterprise in each of the 216 Districts in
the “One District, One Factory” policy
6. development of strategic anchor initiatives as new pillars of growth for
the Ghanaian economy, including the establishment of petrochemical
industries; an iron and steel industry; an integrated aluminum industry;
the expansion of the domestic production of pharmaceuticals; the
establishment of a vehicle assembly and automotive industry; the
production of industrial salt; the establishment of garment and textiles
enterprises; and the manufacture of machinery, equipment and
component parts
7. establishment of a multi-purpose industrial park in each of the ten
regions
8. implementation of a comprehensive programme for SME development
9. establishment of an industrial sub-contracting exchange to link large
scale companies with SMEs
10. implementation of an aggressive programme for export development,
targeting, primarily, regional and continental markets
11. enhancement of domestic retail market infrastructure and the active
promotion of the marketing and distribution of domestically produced
goods
12. improvement of the business environment through regulatory and other
reforms, and
13. establishment of a permanent consultative forum for public-private
sector dialogue.
We are confident that, through these interventions, significant job
opportunities will be opened to Ghanaians across the country.
Mr. Speaker, the Takoradi to Paga railway, connecting the Eastern and
Western corridors, will be initiated this year to open up our country and
provide access to our landlocked neighbours. It will also provide a lot of jobs.
9
Mr Speaker, probably the most difficult problem, that has dogged this nation
in the past five years, has been in the energy sector. This has caused havoc in
small, medium and large enterprises. It has disrupted families and businesses
and brought many organizations to their knees.
The most obvious manifestation of the energy problem has earned us
notoriety in the world, with the entry into Wikipedia and other dictionaries of
the word DUMSOR. It is a phenomenon that has blighted our lives, destroyed
appliances and collapsed many companies. The attempts by the previous
government to resolve the crisis have led to a gargantuan debt overhang in
the sector.
We have inherited a heavily indebted energy sector, with the net debt
reaching 2.4 billion US dollars as at December 2016. I have to point out the
alarming fact that 800 million US dollars of this debt is owed to local banks,
which threatens their stability and that of the whole financial sector. Indeed,
the huge indebtedness of the energy sector constitutes the single major
hurdle to Ghanaians enjoying reliable and affordable electricity supply.
Mr Speaker, there has been some improvement in the power supply since
November last year, but the challenges facing Ghana’s power sector are far
from over. The key problem is cost. We produce power from Akosombo at
three US cents per kilowatt hour. The marginal price charged for businesses is
an effective 42 cents, more than ten times the average tariff in West Africa.
This makes it very difficult to start or run a business here and be competitive.
The cost of energy destroys businesses large and small. It is the bane of the
vulcanizer, the tailor, the dressmaker and the hairdresser, the carpenter and
the wayside fitting mechanic. It destroys jobs. It compounds poverty. The
current state of the energy situation in our country is unsatisfactory.
The problems are enormous, but we must, and we will, confront them.
I am proposing a number of policy interventions. We will improve on
transparency in tariff setting, and introduce a new tariff policy that will
reclassify consumer categories in order to protect lifeline and strategic
industrial consumers. We will also reduce significantly some of the levies and
taxes on the tariffs.
As at the end of 2016, the Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG) had signed 43
Power Purchase Agreements (PPA), whilst a further 23 were under discussion.
Government is conducting a review of all the Power Agreements entered into
by the previous government in order to prioritise, renegotiate, defer or cancel
outright, if necessary, in the national interest. 
10
Overall, we have begun to develop a national electricity masterplan, which will
also explore the benefits of listing VRA and GRIDCO on the Stock Exchange.
Mr. Speaker, my government will enforce the procurement law. We will insist
on open and competitive bidding for power capacity procurement. This will
not only reduce the cost of power projects and ensure value for money, but
will also address the problem of unplanned procurement.
Government will encourage increased private sector investment in utility scale
solar and wind energy projects, as well as accelerate the development of
mini-grid solutions in off-grid and island communities for lighting, irrigation
and other economic activities.
We will, consequently, review the Renewable Energy Act to provide further
incentives to attract the private sector to invest.
Mr Speaker, the Ghana Compact II programme has officially come into force.
Both parties to the Compact, the Governments of Ghana and United States of
America, are committed to complying with their obligations. However, the
implementation of Ghana’s commitments has faced some challenges due to
disagreements between stakeholders, particularly between labour, ECG and
the Millennium Development Authority (MiDA).
We need further dialogue on the key issues that have generated these
disagreements. We are aware that these discussions should be concluded
urgently in order to arrive at the decisions that will allow for its
implementation. We expect that all stakeholders will discuss these issues
dispassionately and transparently, to ensure that all concerns are adequately
addressed.
Mr. Speaker, the success of all our plans and all our aspirations depends on
our ability to educate our young people, and provide the opportunity for
lifelong education to the adult population. Mr. Speaker, it is not an original
statement, but it is a true statement: education is the key; education holds
the key to the rapid development of our country; it holds the key to a better
understanding and accommodation with our environment; it equips us with
the skills required to deal with the world; education holds the key to the
prosperous and happy Ghana we all want and deserve.
Luckily, there is consensus amongst us on the need to provide quality
education to all of Ghana’s children. If I am in a hurry, I am in a hurry to
ensure that every child born in this country attends school from Kindergarten
to Senior High School; in other words, that is the basic education that each 
11
child is required to receive. We intend to reform the basic school curricula
with emphasis on literacy, numeracy and creative skills.
And just in case there is anyone left in this country who has not heard yet,
Free SHS starts with the 2017/2018 entrants into the public SHS.
We shall embark upon a vigorous expansion and re-equipping of Technical,
Vocational and Agricultural schools and align all TVAET under the Ministry of
Education to ensure standardization.
The teaching of mathematics and science will take pride of place in all
schools, as we aim to make understanding of the scientific basis of life a
central plank in our schools. We will, thus, make the use of ICT a central
feature of our national life.
My government shall place teachers at the centre of quality education, and
encourage professionalism among them. There will have to be some
legislative reforms to ease some of the bottlenecks at the district level of
supervision.
By the way, teacher trainee allowances will be restored when the Minister of
Finance comes to read the budget. We keep our promises, just as we shall
ensure that our sports development is hinged on the revival of school sports.
Mr. Speaker, there has been far too much tension in the education sector. It
is in everyone’s interest that the school experience is a happy one for
children, teachers and parents alike. The happy and skilled population that will
drive the path to development starts at school. We aim to provide the key to
prosperity in our schools.
Mr. Speaker, we have to be healthy if we are to make a success of the plans
and aspirations we have. The National Health Insurance Scheme remains the
best option we have devised to ensure that as many people as possible have
access to health care in our clinics and hospitals. The scheme is not in a good
state, and there are too many providers that are owed money. They are
threatening to opt out and stop offering their services to the most vulnerable
in our society. We shall restore the National Health Insurance Scheme to good
health.
And yes, the Minister for Finance will restore the allowances to trainee nurses
in the budget.
Mr. Speaker, government will work with Parliament to pass the Affirmative
Action Bill to increase women’s involvement in decision making at all levels,
and enable us achieve our current objective of 30 per cent participation of
women in public appointments.
12
Mr. Speaker, the time has come to enforce the Disability Act and ensure its
compliance, which will begin with access to public buildings for the physically
challenged. The Minister for Local Government will also see to the
implementation of the District Integrated Social Services programme for
children, families and vulnerable adults.
Mr. Speaker, our people can only prosper and flourish in an atmosphere of
peace and security. Safeguarding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the nation is critical for our progress.
We will improve the state of combat readiness of our armed forces by
improving the logistical infrastructure, and improve the welfare of service men
and women and also of veterans. Our armed forces remain one of the bestorganized
and most professional in Africa.
Mr. Speaker, I bring you greetings from The Gambia, where I was a guest last
weekend at the inauguration ceremony of President Adama Barrow. Ghana
should always take its membership of ECOWAS seriously, as its viability
advances our national interest.
One of the first issues that came to my attention, as soon as I assumed office,
was the request from ECOWAS to send a military contingent from Ghana, as
part of the ECOWAS Mission in The Gambia (ECOMIG) to resolve the postelectoral
impasse in that country. Senegal was to provide 3,150; Nigeria 509;
and Ghana 210 troops. I assented to the request as it involved large issues of
regional stability, and the preservation of democracy and rule of law in a
member state. Ghana sent 208 troops. The Mission succeeded in creating the
necessary environment for the rule of law to be maintained, and for the
rightful transfer of authority to the newly elected President. I saw with my
own eyes how popular that event has been in the Gambia; and how popular is
the ECOWAS mission.
Consequently, ECOWAS has now put forward a new mandate which involves
reducing the force to one of 500 soldiers, intended to be a stabilisation force.
As from yesterday, February 20, Senegal will provide 250, Nigeria 200 and
Ghana 50 troops in the force.
Presently about 3,000 Ghanaian soldiers are involved in peace keeping
operations around the globe. We need to do more to keep their morale high
and empower them. We have decided that they should be paid their
allowances at post, and not on their return. I am glad to say that this new
regime of payment has been applied to the case of The Gambian deployment. 
13
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to be able to inform the House that
the outstanding arrears of 13 million US dollars for all peacekeeping personnel
have been cleared by my government, and the contingents in the Gambia
have been paid all their allowances in full.
I have asked the Minister for Defence to come shortly before Parliament and
make a statement on the Gambian deployment.
There are serious difficulties facing our armed forces that are not unlike those
facing other parts of our public sector. Overcrowded and inappropriate
accommodation for personnel, inability to pay food and utility bills, and
threats from providers to cut supplies; these are the everyday stories in all
departments and our armed forces face the same problems. It is a regrettable
state of affairs that will not continue under my administration.
Mr. Speaker, the police are the first line of security and protection for citizens.
We must have an efficient police service that has the confidence and support
of the people. I am determined to give whatever support is required from
government to ensure that we have the service that the people of Ghana
deserve. We must get a more professional police service, where recruitment
and training practices are of acceptable international standards. We shall
continue recruitment into the police service, with the aim of meeting the U.N
ratio of 1 police officer to 500 civilians, and also ensuring gender equity.
All of us are agreed on the Ghana we want; a prosperous, united and peaceful
country. Some countries have made progress in the economic field and
achieved some of the results we desire. I have listened with incredulity, as
some amongst us have advocated the harsh methods that appear to have
helped some countries achieve rapid progress.
Some, amongst us, seem to be flirting with the concept of authoritarianism
and romanticising it, as an acceptable price to pay to achieve rapid
development.
Mr. Speaker, I have an unshakable and undying belief in freedom and the
democratic process, and in their capacity to inspire rapid development.
Development in freedom should remain our moral anchor. That is the
Ghanaian way and that is the Akufo-Addo way.
The rule of law should remain our guiding and unbending principle. Those of
us in public service should acknowledge that corruption is one of the biggest
concerns to the people of Ghana. It is the one subject on which a surprising
number of people are willing to tolerate a waiver of due process. This is 
14
because, unfortunately, public officials are in danger of losing the confidence
of the people in the fight against corruption. There is a perception that all
public officials are part of a great scam to defraud the public and that they
protect each other. It is in everybody’s interest that the fight against
corruption is transparent and has the support of the public.
Mr Speaker, the office of the Special Prosecutor has been shown to work in
other places, and I shall be bringing legislation before the House for its rapid
establishment. I am satisfied that the Office will be established in a manner
consistent with the Constitution. In like manner, I shall propose for legislation
amendments to the current asset declaration regime to make it more
effective.
Mr Speaker, the people of Ghana have voted for change. All the various arms
of government should recognize this strong desire on the part of the people
for change. We continue along the path of business as usual at our own risk.
Mr Speaker, my personal belief in and adherence to the concept of the
separation of powers is well-known, and I do not intend to interfere in any
way in the affairs of Parliament or the Judiciary. But I would be failing in my
duty if I failed to say what needs to be said.
Mr Speaker, all three arms of government, the Executive, the Judiciary and
the Legislature need to take cognisance of the clear desire of the people of
Ghana for change. All three branches must change the way we do things. I
ask this Honourable House to take a candid look at itself and consider
changing the way it conducts its business, if needs be.
Mr Speaker, there are some areas of our lives in which we can all
demonstrate the change for which the people of Ghana have voted:
punctuality, sanitation and the care of the environment. Over the years, it has
become acceptable practice that official functions invariably start and close
late. We invite people to functions for 9am and start at 10am. I have heard
some offer the preposterous excuse that there is something cultural about not
paying attention to time. Mr Speaker, let us show that we acknowledge that
change has, indeed, come by being punctual to functions. I intend to set a
personal example.
The other area of our lives in which we can and should start making a change
is the care of the environment.. We are in danger of destroying our blessed
country. Ours is a beautiful country. If we claim to love our country, we must
take care of the lands, the trees, the water bodies and the animals. They are
part of what makes Ghana. 
15
The change we have voted for demands that we adopt better and sustainable
sanitation habits, and learn to protect and preserve our environment.
Mr. Speaker, there is one subject on my mind that I wish to put before the
House for consideration. I believe, in this 60th year of our nation, that the time
is ripe for us to establish consensus on some national issues. It is important
for us to have a conversation on how we name things that are of national
importance to us all. I speak of the seat of the Presidency and Founder’s’ Day.
In my view, it is not right that, 60 years after independence, these matters
are still at large. It does not inure to the dignity of the Ghanaian Republic that
such matters have become subject to political football.
I believe we have to settle these matters once and for all, and in due course,
I propose we have a national conversation and dialogue to this effect which,
hopefully, will end in legislation that will reflect the national consensus.
Mr. Speaker, in a few days’ time, we shall mark the 60th anniversary of the
independence of our country. Ebenezer, thus far has the Lord brought us.
Mr. Speaker, we all know where we want Ghana to be, and we are aware we
are not where we want to be or ought to be. We also know of the big dreams
of our forefathers to build a self-reliant and self-sustaining nation that would
take pride of place amongst the comity of nations.
This anniversary provides us with the opportunity to reflect on our past and
plan for the future. This is the Ghana we see – a new Ghana.
We will put in place policies that will deliver sustainable growth and cut out
corruption.
We will set upon the path to build a Ghana that is not dependent on charity; a
Ghana that is able to look after its people through intelligent management of
the resources with which it has been endowed.
This is our path, and this path offers a new Ghana.
This Ghana will be defined by integrity, sovereignty, a common ethos,
discipline, and shared values. It is one where we aim to be masters of our
own destiny, where we mobilise our own resources for the future, breaking
the shackles of the “Guggisberg” colonial economy and a mind-set of
dependency, bailouts and extraction. It is an economy where we look past
commodities to position ourselves in a global marketplace. It is a country
where we focus on trade, not aid, a hand-up, not a hand-out. It is a country
with a strong private sector. It is a country that recognises the connectedness
of its people and economy to those of its neighbours.
16
This requires a forward-looking vision for our country, enabling us to confront
our challenges and embrace our opportunities, not one fastened in the rearview
mirror.
It is a Ghana beyond aid.
Mr. Speaker, thank you, and may God bless our homeland Ghana and make
her great and strong.